CHAPTER 57

Gastrointestinal Disorders

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT DISORDERS
HYPEREMESIS GRAVIDARUM
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
SMALL BOWEL AND COLON DISORDERS
ACUTE DIARRHEA
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
APPENDICITIS
REFERENCES
During normal pregnancy, the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and its appendages
undergo remarkable anatomical, physiological, and functional alterations.
These changes, which are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 (p. 70), can
appreciably alter clinical findings normally relied on for diagnosis and
treatment. Moreover, as pregnancy progresses, GI findings become more
difficult to assess. The clinical examination is often obscured by a large
uterus that displaces abdominal organs and can alter the location and
intensity of pain and tenderness.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ Diagnostic Techniques
Endoscopy
Several endoscopic methods can be used to evaluate the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract during pregnancy without reliance on radiographic techniques. With
fiberoptic endoscopic instruments, the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and
colon can be inspected (Savas, 2014; Song, 2018). The proximal jejunum
also can be studied, and the ampulla of Vater cannulated to perform
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography—ERCP (Fogel, 2014;
Hedström, 2017). Experience in pregnancy with video capsule endoscopy
for small-bowel evaluation remains limited (Bandorski, 2016). Normal
pregnancy-related slowing of GI motility and thus increased transit time as
well as the recorder capsule’s electromagnetic field are theoretical concerns.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is used for diagnosis and management
of several problems. Common bile duct exploration and drainage are used
for choledocholithiasis (Chap. 58, p. 1043). Sclerotherapy and placement of
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes also are performed
endoscopically.
Colonoscopy is indispensible for viewing the entire colon and distal
ileum. Except for the midtrimester, reports of colonoscopy during pregnancy
are limited, but most results suggest that it should be performed if necessary
(De Lima, 2015; Ludvigsson, 2017). Pregnancy indications include chronic
abdominal pain, hematochezia, and diarrhea (Cappell, 2011). Bowel
preparation is completed using polyethylene glycol electrolyte (GoLYTELY)
or sodium sulfate (Suprep) solutions (American Society for Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy, 2015). With these, most women avoid serious dehydration that
may cause diminished uteroplacental perfusion. In select cases, tap water
enemas may be an alternative for rectosigmoidoscopy to avoid some of these
risks.
Endoscopic procedures should be performed when indicated and ideally
in the second trimester (American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy,
2012; Ludvigsson, 2017). A multidisciplinary approach with obstetricians,
gastroenterologists, and anesthesiologists is prudent. Table 57-1 outlines
preprocedural considerations in pregnancy.

TABLE 57-1. Preprocedural Considerations for Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy During Pregnancy

Noninvasive Imaging Techniques
The ideal technique for GI tract imaging during pregnancy is abdominal
sonography. However, the gravid uterus may obscure abdominal organs
making evaluation difficult. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging allows
inspection of the abdomen and retroperitoneal space yet avoids radiation
exposure from computed tomography (CT) (Khandelwal, 2013). Examples
are MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and MR enterography (MRE)
(Oto, 2009; Stern, 2014). These and other imaging modalities, and their safe
use in pregnancy, are discussed in Chapter 49.

Laparotomy and Laparoscopy
Surgery is lifesaving for certain GI conditions—perforative appendicitis
being the most common example. Intraabdominal surgery is the most
frequently performed nonobstetrical procedure during pregnancy (Devroe,
2019). Laparoscopic procedures have replaced traditional surgical
techniques for many abdominal disorders during pregnancy (Ye, 2019).
These are discussed in detail with descriptions of surgical technique in
Chapter 49 (p. 867) and in Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Kho, 2017). Guidelines for laparoscopy during
pregnancy have been provided by the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019) and the Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeons (Pearl, 2017).

■ Nutritional Support

Specialized nutritional support can be delivered enterally, usually via
nasogastric tube feedings, or parenterally by venous catheter access, either
peripherally or centrally.
When possible, enteral alimentation is preferable because it has fewer
serious complications (Hoffer, 2018; Stokke, 2015). In obstetrical patients,
very few conditions prohibit enteral nutrition as a first effort to prevent
catabolism. For extreme cases, such as recalcitrant hyperemesis gravidarum,
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy with a jejunal port (PEG-J tube) has
been described.
Parenteral nutrition provides nutrients when the intestinal tract must be
quiescent. Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) administers dilute nutrient
admixtures and is appropriate for short-term use. Central venous access is
necessary for central parenteral nutrition (CPN) because its
hyperosmolarity requires rapid dilution in a high-flow vascular system
(Robinson, 2018; Worthington, 2017). These solutions provide 24 to 40
kcal/kg/d, principally as a hypertonic glucose solution. Various conditions
may prompt CPN during pregnancy (Table 57-2). The most common
indications are short bowel syndrome and dysmotility disorders, and feeding
duration averages 33 days (Billiauws, 2017).
TABLE 57-2. Some Conditions Treated with Enteral or Parenteral
Nutrition During Pregnancya

Parenteral nutrition complications are frequent and may be severe
(Hoffer, 2018). The most common is catheter sepsis, and Folk (2004)
reported a 25-percent incidence in 27 women with hyperemesis gravidarum.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides detailed guidelines
to prevent catheter-related sepsis (O’Grady, 2011). Other maternal
complications include upper-extremity venous thrombosis, volume overload,
and reversible liver dysfunction. Perinatal complications are rare, however,
fetal subdural hematoma caused by maternal vitamin K deficiency has been
described (Sakai, 2003).

Appreciable morbidity is also associated with long-term use of a
peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC). Again, infection is the most
common serious long-term complication (Hoffer, 2018; Holmgren, 2008). In
a series of 84 such catheters inserted in 66 pregnant women, Cape and
coworkers (2014) reported a 56-percent complication rate, and bacteremia
was the most frequent. For short-term nutrition lasting a few weeks, PICC
placement and its greater benefit-versus-risk ratio seems reasonable
(Worthington, 2017).

UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT DISORDERS
■ Hyperemesis Gravidarum
Mild to moderate nausea and vomiting are especially common in pregnant
women until approximately 16 weeks’ gestation (Chap. 10, p. 191). In a
small but significant proportion of these, however, it is severe and
unresponsive to simple dietary modification and antiemetics. Hyperemesis
gravidarum is defined variably as severe unrelenting nausea and vomiting
that produces weight loss, dehydration, ketosis, alkalosis from loss of
hydrochloric acid, and hypokalemia. Acidosis develops from partial
starvation. In some women, transient hepatic dysfunction develops, and
biliary sludge accumulates (Table 58-1, p. 1031). Other causes should first
be considered because hyperemesis gravidarum is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Study criteria are not standardized, and thus population incidences vary
(Koot, 2018). However, an ethnic or familial predilection has been
described (London, 2017). In several population-based studies, the
hospitalization rate for hyperemesis gravidarum was 0.5 to 2.1 percent
(Fiaschi, 2019; Vikanes, 2013). Up to 25 percent of those hospitalized in a
previous pregnancy for hyperemesis will again require admission (Nurmi,
2018).
The etiopathogenesis of hyperemesis gravidarum is unknown and is
likely multifactorial. High or rapidly rising serum levels of pregnancyrelated hormones such as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), estrogen,
progesterone, placental growth hormone, prolactin, thyroxine, and
adrenocortical hormones are implicated (London, 2017; Verberg, 2005).
Other associated hormones include ghrelins, leptin, nesfatin-1, and peptide
YY 3–36 (Albayrak, 2013; Gungor, 2013).

Superimposed on this hormonal cornucopia are many biological and
environmental factors. Moreover, in some but not all severe cases,
interrelated psychological components play a major role (Mitchell-Jones,
2017; Senturk, 2017). Factors that increase the risk for admission include
hyperthyroidism, previous pregnancy complicated by hyperemesis, diabetes,
GI illnesses, some restrictive diets, and asthma (Fell, 2006; Fiaschi, 2016;
Mullin, 2012). An association of Helicobacter pylori infection has been
proposed, but evidence is inconclusive (Goldberg, 2007; London, 2017).
Chronic marijuana use may cause the similar cannabinoid hyperemesis
syndrome (Alaniz, 2015; Andrews, 2015). And for unknown reasons—
perhaps estrogen-related—a female fetus raises the risk but smoking and
obesity decrease it by 1.5-fold (Cedergren, 2008; Fiaschi, 2016). Some have
reported a relationship between severe hyperemesis gravidarum and anemia,
venous thromboembolism (VTE), gestational hypertension, and preeclampsia
(Fiaschi, 2018). An association between hyperemesis and preterm birth is
unclear (Kleine, 2017). Koren and colleagues (2018) suggested that
prolonged vomiting may cause metabolic abnormalities that interfere with
fetal brain development. No long-term maternal consequences follow
hyperemesis. Specifically, two population-based studies found no
unfavorable cardiovascular risks in Norwegian women (Fossum, 2017,
2018).

Complications
Vomiting may be prolonged, frequent, and severe, and a list of potentially
fatal complications is given in Table 57-3. Various degrees of acute kidney
injury from dehydration are encountered, and rhabdomyolysis may be
contributory (Lassey, 2016). Rarely, we and others have encountered women
with renal failure requiring dialysis (Dayangan Sayan, 2018; Hill, 2002).
Mallory-Weiss tears result from continuous retching. Other complications
include pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, diaphragmatic rupture, and
gastroesophageal rupture—Boerhaave syndrome (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Chen, 2012).
TABLE 57-3. Some Serious and Life-Threatening Complications Reported
with Hyperemesis Gravidaruma

At least two serious vitamin deficiencies have been reported with
hyperemesis in pregnancy. One is Wernicke encephalopathy from thiamine
deficiency (Di Gangi, 2012; Palacios-Marqués, 2012). A systematic review
reported that ocular signs, confusion, and ataxia were common, and
approximately 60 percent had this triad (Oudman, 2019). In some women, an
abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG) may be seen, and usually MR
imaging shows findings (Oudman, 2019; Vaknin, 2006; Zara, 2012). One
woman had recurrent encephalopathy in a subsequent pregnancy (Stephens,
2019). Maternal deaths have been described, and long-term sequelae include
blindness, convulsions, and coma (Oudman, 2019; Selitsky, 2006). Vitamin
K is a second potential deficiency. Maternal coagulopathy, fetal intracranial
hemorrhage, and vitamin K embryopathy have been reported (Kawamura,
2008; Lane, 2015; Nijsten, 2021).

Management
One management algorithm for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy is shown in
Figure 57-1. Most women with mild to moderate symptoms respond to
outpatient therapy with any of several first-line antiemetic agents (Boelig,
2018, McParlin, 2016). One mainstay is Diclegis—a combination of
doxylamine (10 mg) plus pyridoxine (10 mg). The usual dose is two tablets
orally at bedtime, and it appears safe and effective (Briggs, 2017; Koren,

2014). If relief is insufficient, one additional first-morning tablet is added to
the bedtime dose. This can be further escalated to include one first-morning,
one midafternoon, and two bedtime tablets (Duchesnay Inc., 2018). At our
institution, for cost savings, we prescribe these two agents individually. The
formula is one half of a 25-mg Unisom (doxylamine) tablet plus a 25-mg
vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) tablet. The same graduated dosing is used but does
not exceed three total daily doses.

FIGURE 57-1 Algorithm for outpatient and inpatient management of pregnancy nausea and vomiting,
and hyperemesis gravidarum.

Ondansetron (Zofran) is slightly more effective than the combination of
doxylamine and pyridoxine (Oliveira, 2014; Pasternak, 2013). In some
studies, the former has been associated with birth defects (Briggs, 2017).
However, after a recent systematic review of Cochrane and Reprotox
databases, authors concluded that ondansetron is not teratogenic (Kaplan,
2019). Other drawbacks include potential maternal effects from prolonged
QT-interval and serotonin syndrome. For these reasons it is preferably
reserved for severe cases after 8 weeks’ gestation (Lavecchia, 2018).
When simple measures fail, intravenous (IV) crystalloid solutions are
given to correct dehydration, ketonemia, electrolyte deficits, and acid-base
imbalances. Hypokalemia is common, and cardiac arrest has been reported
(Walch, 2018). No benefits are gained by infusing 5-percent dextrose along
with crystalloids (Tan, 2013). Thiamine, 100 mg, is usually diluted in 1 L of
the selected crystalloid to prevent Wernicke encephalopathy for women who
require IV hydration and have vomited for more than 3 weeks (Giugale,
2015). It is infused at the maintenance rate desired for patient hydration. This
thiamine dose is provided daily for the next 2 to 3 days and is followed by
IV multivitamins if IV hydration continues (Levichek, 2002).
If vomiting persists after rehydration and failed outpatient management,
hospitalization is recommended (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). IV hydration is continued and antiemetics such as
promethazine, prochlorperazine, chlorpromazine, or metoclopramide are
given parenterally (Table 57-4). Several antiemetics are associated with the
long-QT syndrome, discussed in Chapter 52 (p. 936). Outpatient treatment
regimens at the hospital also are effective (McCarthy, 2014).
TABLE 57-4. Medications for Gastrointestinal Disorders in Pregnancy

Some, but not all, studies indicate that treatment with
glucocorticosteroids is not effective (Sridharan, 2020; Yost, 2003). They are
recommended only for refractory cases because of their putative
teratogenicity (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).
With persistent vomiting after hospitalization, appropriate steps should
be taken to exclude possible underlying diseases as a cause of hyperemesis.
That said, in one study, endoscopy did not change management in 49 women
(Debby, 2008). Other potential sources include gastroenteritis, cholecystitis,
pancreatitis, hepatitis, peptic ulcer, and pyelonephritis. In addition, severe
preeclampsia and fatty liver are more likely after midpregnancy. Although

clinical thyrotoxicosis has been implicated as a cause of hyperemesis, it is
more likely that abnormally elevated serum thyroxine levels are a surrogate
for higher-than-average serum hCG levels (Sun, 2014). This is discussed
further in Chapter 5 (p. 97). In our experiences, serum free thyroxine levels
normalize quickly with hydration and emesis treatment.
With treatment, most women will have a positive response and may be
sent home with oral antiemetic therapy. The readmission rate is 25 to 35
percent in most prospective studies. Risks for anxiety and depression are
increased in these women (Mitchell-Jones, 2017; Senturk, 2017). At
Parkland Hospital, more than one third of women with hyperemesis required
readmission. Patient characteristics had limited utility in predicting the risk
of readmission. For example, maternal demographics, substance use,
psychiatric illness, and initial hospitalization length were not associated with
readmission (White, 2018). If psychiatric and social factors contribute to the
illness, the woman usually improves remarkably while hospitalized
(Swallow, 2004). However, symptoms relapse in a fourth of these women,
and some go on to develop posttraumatic stress syndrome (Chap. 64, p.
1150) (Christodoulou-Smith, 2011; McCarthy, 2011; Nurmi, 2018). For some
women, hyperemesis may be an indication for elective termination
(Poursharif, 2007).
Grooten and colleagues (2017) showed that early enteral tube feeding has
no advantages. However, in the small percentage of women who have
recalcitrant vomiting after intensive therapy, consideration is given for
enteral nutrition (p. 1013). Stokke and associates (2015) described
successful use of nasojejunal feeding for up to 41 days in 107 such women.
Use of sonography to confirm correct tube placement has been described and
avoids radiation exposure (Swartzlander, 2013). PEG-J tubes also have been
reported (Saha, 2009; Schrag, 2007).
Only a very few women will require parenteral nutrition (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Yost, 2003). In a study of
599 women, however, Peled and coworkers (2014) reported that 20 percent
required central parenteral nutrition.

■ Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Symptomatic reflux is seen in up to 15 percent of nonpregnant individuals
(Kahrilas, 2018). The spectrum of sequelae includes esophagitis, stricture,

Barrett esophagus, and adenocarcinoma. The main symptom of reflux is
pyrosis (heartburn), which is especially common in pregnancy. In one study,
its prevalence rose from 26 percent in the first trimester to 36 percent in the
second and 51 percent in the third trimester (Fill Malfertheiner, 2017). The
retrosternal burning sensation stems from esophagitis caused by
gastroesophageal reflux of stomach acid, which follows relaxation of the
lower esophageal sphincter. The diagnosis is typically made from symptoms
alone.
Symptoms usually respond to abstaining from tobacco and alcohol, eating
small meals, elevating the head of the bed, limiting postprandial recumbency,
and avoiding “trigger” foods. These may include fatty foods, tomato-based
foods, and coffee. Oral antacids are first-line therapy. If severe symptoms
persist, a proton-pump inhibitor is given and an H2-receptor antagonist and
sucralfate can be added (see Table 57-4). Both classes are generally safe for
use in pregnancy (Briggs, 2017). From preliminary data, proton-pump
inhibitors taken early in pregnancy may increase the risk for preeclampsia
(Hastie, 2019). Sucralfate is the aluminum salt of sulfated sucrose and
inhibits pepsin. Approximately 10 percent of the aluminum salt is absorbed,
and this agent is considered safe for pregnant women (Briggs, 2017). A 1-g
sucralfate tablet is taken orally 1 hour before each of the three meals and at
bedtime for up to 8 weeks. Antacids are not used within a half hour before or
after sucralfate doses. Despite attempts with these options, if relief is not
attained, endoscopy should be considered. Misoprostol is contraindicated
because it stimulates labor (Chap. 26, p. 490).
In nonpregnant patients, surgical fundoplication can be performed
(Kahrilas, 2018). Although the procedure is not done during pregnancy,
Biertho and colleagues (2006) described 25 women who had undergone
laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication before pregnancy. Only 20 percent had
reflux symptoms during pregnancy.

■ Hiatal Hernia
The older literature is informative regarding hiatal hernias in pregnancy.
Upper gastrointestinal radiographs performed in 195 women in late
pregnancy showed that 20 percent of 116 multiparas and 5 percent of 79
nulliparas had a hiatal hernia (Rigler, 1935). Of 10 women studied
postpartum, hernia persisted in three at 1 to 18 months.

The relationship of hiatal hernia with reflux esophagitis is not clear. One
study demonstrated no association and showed that the lower esophageal
sphincter functioned effectively even when displaced intrathoracically
(Cohen, 1971). Nevertheless, during pregnancy, hiatal hernias may cause
vomiting, epigastric pain, and bleeding from ulceration. Schwentner (2011)
reported severe herniation requiring surgical repair in a woman with a 12week gestation. Curran and coworkers (1999) described a 30-week
pregnancy complicated by gastric outlet obstruction from a paraesophageal
hernia.

■ Diaphragmatic Hernia
These are caused by herniations of abdominal contents through either the
foramen of Bochdalek or Morgagni. Fortunately, they rarely complicate
pregnancy. In one review of 18 pregnant women who developed acute
obstruction within a diaphragmatic hernia, the maternal mortality rate was 45
percent (Kurzel, 1988). Herniation has been reported in one woman who had
antireflux surgery in early pregnancy (Brygger, 2013). Several case reports
also describe spontaneous diaphragmatic rupture from elevated
intraabdominal pressure during delivery (Chen, 2012; Sharifah, 2003).
Surgical treatment is considered in symptomatic gravidas and is
individualized according to gestational age and clinical setting (Ménassa,
2019; Whang, 2018).

■ Achalasia
In this rare motility disorder, the lower esophageal sphincter fails to relax
properly with swallowing. The esophageal muscularis also displays
nonperistaltic contraction activity (Kahrilas, 2018). The defect is caused by
inflammatory destruction of the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus within smooth
muscle of the lower esophagus and its sphincter. Postganglionic cholinergic
neurons are unaffected, and thus sphincter stimulation is unopposed.
Symptoms are dysphagia, chest pain, and regurgitation. Barium swallow
radiography demonstrates bird beak or ace of spades narrowing at the distal
esophagus. Endoscopy is performed to exclude gastric carcinoma, and
manometry is confirmatory.

During pregnancy, normal physiological relaxation of the lower
esophageal sphincter in women with achalasia theoretically should not occur.
In one series, half of these women had worsened symptoms, but reflux is
uncommon (Vogel, 2018). In other pregnancy studies, most women did not
have worsening symptoms (Khudyak, 2006). At least one maternal death was
reported at 24 weeks’ gestation and perforation of a 14-cm-diameter
megaesophagus was implicated (Fassina, 1995).
Management of achalasia includes a soft diet and anticholinergic drugs.
With persistent symptoms, other options include nitrates, calcium-channel
antagonists, and botulinum toxin A injected locally (Hooft, 2015; Kahrilas,
2018). Balloon dilation of the sphincter may be necessary, and 85 percent of
nonpregnant patients respond (Vogel, 2018). One caveat is that esophageal
perforation is a serious complication of dilation. If dilation or medical
therapy fail to provide relief, myotomy is considered. In one report, a 29week pregnant woman with achalasia was treated for 10 weeks with
peripheral parenteral nutrition, and surgical myotomy was done postpartum
(Spiliopoulos, 2013).

■ Peptic Ulcer Disease
The lifetime prevalence of acid peptic disorders in women is 10 percent
(Del Valle, 2018). Erosive ulcer disease involves the stomach and
duodenum. Gastroduodenal ulcers commonly are caused by chronic gastritis
from Helicobacter pylori, or they develop from nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) use. Neither is common in pregnancy
(McKenna, 2003; Weyermann, 2003). Rosen and coworkers (2021) reported
2535 pregnant women with peptic ulcer disease and found that complications
were less frequent than in nonpregnant controls.
Acid secretion also is important, and this underlies the efficacy of
antisecretory agents. Natural gastroprotection during pregnancy probably
originates from physiological changes that include reduced gastric acid
secretion, decreased motility, and considerably increased mucus secretion
(Hytten, 1991). Despite this, ulcer disease may be underdiagnosed because
of frequent treatment for reflux esophagitis (Mehta, 2010). In the past 55
years at Parkland Hospital, during which time we have cared for more than
600,000 pregnant women, we have encountered very few who had proven
ulcer disease. Perforation is rare (Goel, 2014). Before appropriate therapy

was commonplace, Clark (1953) studied 313 pregnancies in 118 women
with ulcer disease and noted a clear remission during pregnancy in almost 90
percent. However, benefits were short lived. Symptoms recurred in more
than half by 3 months postpartum and in almost all by 2 years.
The mainstay of management is eradication of H pylori and prevention of
NSAID-induced disease. Antacids are usually self-prescribed, but other
first-line therapy is a proton-pump inhibitor or H2-receptor blocker (see
Table 57-4) (Del Valle, 2018; Laine, 2012). Sucralfate can be added and
provides a protective coating at the ulcer base.
With active ulcers, a search for H pylori is undertaken. Diagnostic aids
include the urea breath test, serological testing, fecal testing, or endoscopic
biopsy. If any of these yield positive results, combination antimicrobial plus
proton-pump inhibitor therapy is indicated (Chey, 2017). Several effective
oral treatment regimens do not include tetracycline and can be used during
pregnancy. One 14-day regimen includes clarithromycin, 500 mg twice daily,
which is paired either with amoxicillin, 1000 mg twice daily or with
metronidazole, 500 mg three times daily. These antibiotics are given with a
proton-pump inhibitor (Del Valle, 2018).

■ Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
In some women, persistent vomiting is accompanied by worrisome upper
gastrointestinal bleeding. Occasionally, a peptic ulcer is the source.
However, most of these women have small linear mucosal tears near the
gastroesophageal junction—Mallory-Weiss tears (p. 1014). Bleeding usually
responds promptly to conservative measures that include IV proton-pump
inhibitors and topical antacids (Laine, 2012). Transfusions may be needed,
and if bleeding persists, endoscopy is usually indicated (O’Mahony, 2007).
With sustained retching, the less common, but more serious, esophageal
rupture—Boerhaave syndrome—may develop from high esophageal
pressure.

SMALL BOWEL AND COLON DISORDERS
The small bowel has diminished motility during pregnancy. Lawson and
colleagues (1985) showed that the small bowel mean transit times of 99,

125, and 137 minutes in each successive trimester, respectively, were slower
than 75 minutes when nonpregnant. Muscular relaxation of the colon is
accompanied by increased absorption of water and sodium that predisposes
to constipation. This complaint is reported by almost 25 percent of women at
some time during pregnancy and the puerperium (Everson, 1992). Symptoms
are usually only mildly bothersome, and initial treatment includes increasing
fluid intake (>8 glasses/d) and fiber consumption (20 to 35 g/d) (Body,
2016). If these lifestyle modifications fail, bulk-forming agents such as
methylcellulose may be added, and in severe cases the stimulant laxative
bisacodyl. We have encountered several pregnant women who developed
megacolon from impacted stool. These women almost invariably had
chronically abused stimulatory laxatives.

■ Acute Diarrhea
The estimated monthly prevalence of diarrhea among adults is 3 to 7 percent
(DuPont, 2014). Diarrhea can be classified as acute (<2 weeks), persistent
(2 to 4 weeks), and chronic (>4 weeks). Most cases of acute diarrhea are
caused by infectious agents, and a third result from foodborne pathogens. The
large variety of viruses, bacteria, helminths, and protozoa that cause diarrhea
in adults also afflict pregnant women. These are usually accompanied by
vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. Some of these are discussed in Chapter
64 (p. 1197).
Evaluation of acute diarrhea depends on its severity and duration. Some
indications for evaluation include profuse watery diarrhea with dehydration,
grossly bloody stools, fever >38°C, duration >48 hr without improvement,
recent antimicrobial use, and diarrhea in the immunocompromised patient
(Camilleri, 2018; DuPont, 2014). Cases of moderately severe diarrhea with
fecal leukocytes or gross blood may be treated with empirical antibiotics
rather than evaluation. However, risks and benefits should be considered,
and it is reasonable to withhold treatment until stool testing is completed to
exclude infection. Some features of the more common acute diarrheal
syndromes and their treatment are shown in Table 57-5.
TABLE 57-5. Etiology, Clinical Features, and Treatment of Common Acute
Diarrheal Syndromes

The mainstay of treatment is IV hydration using normal saline or Ringer
lactate and potassium supplementation in amounts to restore maternal blood
volume and to ensure uteroplacental perfusion. Vital signs and urine output
are monitored for signs of sepsis. For moderately severe nonfebrile illness
without bloody diarrhea or recent travel, antimotility agents such as
loperamide (Imodium) may be useful. An initial 4-mg (two capsules) dose
can be followed with another 2-mg capsule after subsequently passed watery
stools. Dosages should not exceed 8 mg/d, and loperamide is not used for
more than 48 h. Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol) also may alleviate
symptoms. The recommended dosage is 30 mL (525 mg) of its liquid form or
two tablets (263 mg/tablet) chewed well each 30 to 60 min and not to exceed
eight doses in 24 h. The drug will produce harmless black stools (Riddle,
2016).
Judicious use of antimicrobial agents is warranted. For moderately to
severely ill women, some recommend empirical treatment with
ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days. Specific pathogens are treated
as needed when identified (see Table 57-5). Syndromes for which treatment

is usually unnecessary include those caused by Escherichia coli,
staphylococcal species, Bacillus cereus, and norovirus. Severe illness
caused by Salmonella species is treated with ciprofloxacin or trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole; by Campylobacter species with azithromycin; by
Clostridioides difficile with oral vancomycin or fidaxomicin; and by
Giardia species and Entamoeba histolytica with metronidazole (DuPont,
2014; McDonald, 2018; Rocha-Castro, 2016).

Clostridioides difficile Infection
Formally known as Clostridium difficile, this anaerobic gram-positive
bacillus is transmitted by the fecal-oral route. In a study from China, 3.7
percent of normal gravidas were colonized (Ye, 2016). It is the most frequent
nosocomial infection in the United States. In 2011, 453,000 cases of C
difficile and 29,000 associated deaths were reported by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (Lessa, 2015). Its incidence in pregnant
women has doubled during the past decade (Ruiter-Ligeti, 2018). The most
important risk factor is antibiotic use, and the highest risk is with
aminopenicillins, clindamycin, cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones. Other
risk factors include inflammatory bowel disease, immunosuppression,
advanced age, and gastrointestinal surgery. Most cases are hospital-acquired,
however, 10 percent are community-acquired cases (Gerding, 2018). With
severe colitis, the infection-related mortality rate is 5 percent.
Laboratory diagnosis from a stool sample uses nucleic-acid amplification
testing (NAAT) for C difficile itself or uses an enzyme-immunoassay-based
algorithm for a unique C difficile enzyme or its toxins A and B (McDonald,
2018). Less often, infection may be diagnosed endoscopically (Fig. 57-2).
Only patients with new-onset diarrhea and ≥3 unformed stool of unexplained
etiology should be tested, and posttreatment testing is not recommended.
Prevention is by soap-and-water hand washing, and infected individuals are
isolated. Treatment consists of stopping the offending antibiotics and giving
10 days of oral vancomycin, 125 mg four times daily, or fidaxomicin
(Dificid), 200 mg twice daily (McDonald, 2018). The risk of recurrence
after an initial episode is 20 percent. Fecal microbial transplantation may
become standard for recurrent clostridial colitis (Saeedi, 2017).

FIGURE 57-2 Causes of colitis. A. Ulcerative colitis with diffuse ulcerations and exudates. B. Crohn
colitis with deep ulcers. C. Pseudomembranous colitis with yellow, adherent membranes. D. Ischemic
colitis. (Reproduced with permission from Song LM, Topazian M: Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2018.)

■ Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Two presumably noninfectious forms of intestinal inflammation are
ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease. Differentiation between these is
important because treatment differs. That said, they both share common
features, and sometimes are indistinguishable if Crohn disease involves the
colon. The features shown in Table 57-6 permit a reasonably confident
diagnostic differentiation in most cases. The etiopathogenesis is enigmatic in
both, but a genetic predisposition is suspected, especially for Crohn disease.
Inflammation is thought to result from dysregulated mucosal immune function

in response to commensal microbiota, with or without an autoimmune
component (Friedman, 2018).
TABLE 57-6. Some Shared and Differentiating Characteristics of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Ulcerative Colitis
This is a mucosal disorder with inflammation confined to the superficial
luminal layers of the colon. It typically begins at the rectum and extends
proximally for a variable distance. In approximately 40 percent of cases,
disease is confined to the rectum or the rectosigmoid, but 20 percent have
pancolitis. For unknown reasons, prior appendectomy protects against
ulcerative colitis (Friedman, 2018). Endoscopic findings include mucosal
granularity and friability that is interspersed with mucosal ulcerations and a
mucopurulent exudate (see Fig. 57-2).
Major symptoms of ulcerative colitis include diarrhea, rectal bleeding,
tenesmus, and abdominal cramps. The disease is characterized by
exacerbations and remissions. Toxic megacolon and catastrophic hemorrhage
are particularly dangerous complications that may necessitate colectomy.
Extraintestinal manifestations include arthritis, uveitis, and erythema
nodosum. The risk of associated colon cancer approaches 1 percent per year.

With either ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease, risks for VTE are higher in
even asymptomatic women (Friedman, 2018; Mahadevan, 2019).

Crohn Disease
Also known as regional enteritis, Crohn ileitis, or granulomatous colitis,
Crohn disease has more protean manifestations than ulcerative colitis. It
involves not only the mucosa but also the deeper bowel layers (see Fig. 572). Lesions can be seen throughout the entire GI tract, from the mouth to the
anus, but it typically is segmental (Friedman, 2018). Approximately 30
percent of patients have only small-bowel involvement, 25 percent have
isolated colonic involvement, and 40 percent have both, usually with the
terminal ileum and colon involved. Perianal fistulas and abscesses develop
in a third of those with colonic involvement.
Symptoms depend on which bowel segment(s) is involved. Thus,
complaints may include lower-right-sided cramping abdominal pain,
diarrhea, weight loss, low-grade fever, and obstructive symptoms. The
disease is chronic with exacerbations and remissions, and importantly, it
cannot be cured medically or surgically. Approximately a third of patients
require surgery within the first year after diagnosis, and thereafter, the rate is
5 percent per year. Reactive arthritis is common, and the GI cancer risk,
although not as great as with ulcerative colitis, is increased substantially.

Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Fertility
Subfertility in women is linked to active disease, but normal fertility is likely
with quiescent colitis (Mahadevan, 2019). Subfertility may also be partially
attributed to sulfasalazine, which causes reversible sperm abnormalities
(Feagins, 2009).
For women requiring surgical resection, a laparoscopic approach has a
higher subsequent fertility rate (Beyer-Berjot, 2013). With colectomy,
however, although fertility is improved, up to half of women will be
persistently infertile (Bartels, 2012; Lee, 2019a). Sexual function and
fertility are only modestly affected by ileal pouch–anal anastomosis (Hor,
2016).

Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Pregnancy

Because ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease are relatively common in young
women, these disorders are encountered with some frequency in pregnancy.
In many studies, the outcomes are grouped together for both entities. For
example, in a study from Australia, Shand and colleagues (2016) reported a
prevalence of 1 inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) case in 320 births. In this
regard, some generalizations can be made. First, consensus supports that
pregnancy does not increase the likelihood of an IBD flare (Mahadevan,
2019). Indeed, in a 10-year surveillance of women in the European
Collaborative on Inflammatory Bowel Disease, the likelihood of a flare
during pregnancy was lower than the preconceptional rate (Riis, 2006).
Although most women with quiescent disease in early pregnancy do not have
relapses, when a flare develops, it may be severe. Also, and as discussed
subsequently, active disease in early pregnancy increases the likelihood of
disease relapse during pregnancy (de Lima-Karagiannis, 2016).
In general, most usual treatment regimens may be continued during
pregnancy. Diagnostic evaluations should be undertaken if needed to direct
management, and surgery should be performed if indicated (Mahadevan,
2019). Fecal calprotectin, an inflammatory biomarker in stool samples, is a
valid tool in pregnancy to identify IBD flares (Julsgaard, 2017; Lichtenstein,
2018; Rubin, 2019).
At first glance, it appears that adverse pregnancy outcomes are increased
with IBD (Boyd, 2015; Getahun, 2014). Initially, this was attributed to the
fact that most studies included women with either form of disease.
Specifically, Crohn disease was noted to be linked to excessive morbidity.
But, according to Reddy (2008) and others, these adverse outcomes were in
women with severe disease and multiple recurrences. Indeed, in the
prospective European case-control ECCO-EpiCom study of 332 pregnant
women with IBD, outcomes were similar in women with ulcerative colitis or
Crohn disease compared with unaffected pregnant women (Bortoli, 2011).
Still, women with active disease during pregnancy have an increased
frequency of preterm births (Kammerlander, 2017; Shand, 2016).
Importantly, perinatal mortality rates are not appreciably increased.
Ulcerative Colitis and Pregnancy. In one review of 755 pregnancies, colitis
that was quiescent at conception worsened in approximately a third of
pregnancies (Fonager, 1998). In women with active disease at the time of
conception, approximately 45 percent worsened, 25 percent remained

unchanged, and only 25 percent improved. These observations are similar to
those described in a review by Miller (1986) as well as in later reports (de
Lima-Karagiannis, 2016; Oron, 2012).
Osteoporosis is a significant complication in up to a third of affected
women. Thus, vitamin D—800 IU daily—and calcium—1200 mg daily—are
given. Folic acid, 2 to 4 mg orally daily, is recommended preconceptionally
and during the first trimester for neural-tube defect prevention (Mahadevan,
2019). This high dose counteracts the antifolate actions of sulfasalazine.
Flares may be caused by psychogenic stress, and reassurance is important.
Last, the venous thromboembolism risk is doubled, but thromboprophylaxis
is not routinely provided (Hansen, 2017).
Management for colitis for the most part mirrors that outside of
pregnancy. Treatment of active colitis and maintenance therapy incorporate
drugs that deliver 5-aminosalicyclic acid (5-ASA), also known as
mesalamine. Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine) is the prototype, and its 5-ASA
moiety inhibits prostaglandin synthase in colonic mucosa. Others include
olsalazine (Dipentum), balsalazide (Colazal), and delayed-release 5-ASA
derivatives (Apriso, Asacol, Pentasa, Lialda). Glucocorticoids are
beneficial and are given orally, parenterally, or by enema for moderate or
severe disease that does not respond to 5-ASA. Corticosteroids provide a
high remission rate for active disease, but they are not given for maintenance
therapy (Friedman, 2018). Recalcitrant disease is managed with
immunomodulating drugs, including azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine,
cyclosporine, or tacrolimus, which all appear relatively safe in pregnancy
(Briggs, 2017; Mozaffari, 2015). Importantly, methotrexate is teratogenic
and contraindicated in pregnancy (Chap. 8, p. 152).
In the past, biologics were reserved for recalcitrant, moderate to severe
disease. Because of their considerable efficacy, however, these medications
are now frequently given initially for this severity of disease to prevent
future complications. These agents are antibodies against tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-α). Those recommended for IBD treatment are shown in
Table 57-7 (Mahadevan, 2019). Women who begin pregnancy while taking
biologics should continue these through pregnancy until several weeks before
delivery to help avoid maternal infections from immunosuppression. These
agents are administered IV or subcutaneously. Several studies support their
safety in pregnancy, although there are concerns that their discontinuance may
prompt a relapse (Chaparro, 2018; Friedman, 2018; Luu, 2018). Another

worry is that they may cause immunosuppression in the newborn, and early
neonatal vaccination with live-attenuated agents are delayed for at least 6
months (Esteve-Solé, 2017; Julsgaard, 2016).
TABLE 57-7. Biologics Used to Treat Inflammatory Bowel Disease in
Pregnancy

Colorectal endoscopy is performed as indicated. Surgical management is
tailored to disease severity (Killeen, 2017). During pregnancy, colectomy
and ostomy creation for fulminant colitis may be needed as a lifesaving
measure, and it has been described during each trimester. Dozois (2006)
reviewed 42 such cases and found that, in general, outcomes have been good
with partial or complete colectomy. Parenteral nutrition is occasionally
needed for women with prolonged exacerbations.
For women with an ileal pouch and an anal anastomosis, frequency of
bowel movements, fecal incontinence, and pouchitis may temporarily worsen
with pregnancy. The last is an inflammatory condition of the ileoanal pouch
probably due to bacterial proliferation and stasis. Pouchitis usually responds
to ciprofloxacin or metronidazole. In one rare case, adhesions to the growing
uterus led to ileal pouch perforation (Aouthmany, 2004).
In general, women with uncomplicated colitis can be delivered vaginally
(Foulon, 2017). That said, the cesarean delivery rate in these women is
increased (Burke, 2017). It is controversial whether women who have had a
prior proctocolectomy and ileal pouch–anal anastomosis can be safely
delivered vaginally. Hahnloser (2004) reviewed delivery routes in women

with 235 pregnancies before and 232 pregnancies after ileoanal pouch
surgery. Functional outcomes were similar, and it was concluded that
cesarean delivery should be reserved for obstetrical indications. To the
contrary, following their systematic review, Foulon and coworkers (2017)
recommended cesarean delivery with the caveat that uncomplicated vaginal
delivery was safe.
As discussed, quiescent ulcerative colitis likely has minimal adverse
effects on pregnancy outcome. Modigliani (2000) reviewed perinatal
outcomes in 2398 pregnancies and reported them to be not substantively
different from those in the general obstetrical population. Specifically, the
incidences of spontaneous abortion, preterm delivery, and stillbirth were
remarkably low. These authors and others also describe a cesarean delivery
rate that was substantially higher than that for normal controls (Burke, 2017;
Mahadevan, 2015). The previously described ECCO-EpiCom study reported
similar outcomes in 187 gravidas with ulcerative colitis compared with
normal control women (Bortoli, 2011).
Crohn Disease and Pregnancy. In general, Crohn disease activity during
pregnancy is related to its status around the time of conception. In a cohort
study of 279 pregnancies conceived by 186 women whose disease was
inactive at conception, a fourth relapsed during pregnancy (Fonager, 1998).
In 93 with active disease at conception, however, two thirds either remained
active or worsened. Other reviews describe similar findings (Miller, 1986;
Oron, 2012).
Calcium, vitamin D, and folic acid supplementation mirror that for
ulcerative colitis. For maintenance during asymptomatic periods, no regimen
is universally effective. Sulfasalazine is effective for some, but the newer 5ASA formulations are better tolerated. Glucocorticoids induce a 60- to 70percent remission rate (Friedman, 2018). Prednisone therapy may control
moderate to severe flares but is less effective for small-bowel involvement.
Immunomodulators such as azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, cyclosporine,
and tacrolimus are used for active disease and for maintenance. These
appear relatively safe during pregnancy (Chaparro, 2018; Luu, 2018). As
discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 152), methotrexate is contraindicated in
pregnancy. As with ulcerative colitis, treatment with TNF-α inhibitors is
often used initially for active Crohn disease and maintenance (see Table 577) (Friedman, 2018; Mahadevan, 2019).

Endoscopy or conservative surgery is indicated for complications
(Killeen, 2017). Patients with small-bowel involvement are more likely to
require surgery for complications that include fistulas, strictures, obstruction,
abscesses, and intractable disease. In an earlier study, an abdominal surgical
procedure was required during 5 percent of pregnancies (Woolfson, 1990).
Parenteral nutrition has been used successfully during severe recurrences.
Those with an ileal loop colostomy may have significant problems. Unless
there is a perianal fistula or active perianal disease, women with Crohn
disease usually can undergo vaginal delivery without complications (Foulon,
2017; Mahadevan, 2019).
As discussed, Crohn disease compared with ulcerative colitis is
associated with higher adverse pregnancy outcome rates. Outcomes are
probably related to disease activities. In a case-control Danish study,
Norgård (2007) reported a twofold risk of preterm births. Dominitz (2002)
reported a two- to threefold increased risk for preterm delivery, low
birthweight, fetal-growth restriction, and cesarean delivery in 149 women
with Crohn disease. Recall, however, that the ECCO-EpiCom study found
pregnancy outcomes to be similar to those in unaffected women.

■ Ostomy and Pregnancy
A colostomy or an ileostomy can be problematic during pregnancy because
of its location (Hux, 2010). In a report of 82 pregnancies in 66 women with
an ostomy, stomal dysfunction was common, but it responded to
conservative management in most cases (Gopal, 1985). Surgical intervention
was necessary, however, in three of six women who developed bowel
obstruction and in another four with ileostomy prolapse—almost 10 percent
overall. In this older study, only a third of 82 women underwent cesarean
delivery, but Takahashi (2007) described six of seven cesarean deliveries in
women with Crohn disease and a stoma. Although adhesions usually are
involved with an obstructed ileostomy, the enlarging uterus may act to cause
obstruction (Porter, 2014). Last, Farouk and coworkers (2000) reported that
pregnancy did not worsen long-term ostomy function.

■ Intestinal Obstruction

The incidence of bowel obstruction is not increased during pregnancy,
although it generally is more difficult to diagnose. Meyerson (1995) reported
a 20-year incidence of 1 case in 17,000 deliveries at two Detroit hospitals.
Of acute abdomen cases in pregnancy, adhesive disease leading to smallbowel obstruction was second only to appendicitis—15 versus 30 percent,
respectively (Unal, 2011). Approximately half of cases are due to adhesions
from previous pelvic surgery that includes cesarean delivery (Andolf, 2010;
Lyell, 2011). Another 25 percent of bowel obstruction is caused by volvulus,
which may involve sigmoid colon, cecum, or small bowel. These have been
reported in late pregnancy or early puerperium (Al Maksoud, 2015; Bade,
2014). Bokslag (2014) and Wax (2013) and their colleagues described
small-bowel obstruction in pregnancy following the currently popular Rouxen-Y gastric bypass, which is performed for weight loss. Intussusception is
occasionally encountered (Bosman, 2014; Moliere, 2019). Bowel
obstruction subsequent to colorectal surgery for cancer was increased
threefold in women who had open versus laparoscopic surgery (Haggar,
2013). Last, Serra and coworkers (2014) described a massive ventral hernia
with intestinal obstruction.
Most cases of intestinal obstruction during pregnancy result from
pressure of the growing uterus on intestinal adhesions. This is more likely
around midpregnancy when the uterus becomes an abdominal organ; in the
third trimester when the fetal head descends; or immediately postpartum
when uterine size acutely shrinks (Davis, 1983). Perdue (1992) reported that
98 percent of affected pregnant women had either continuous or colicky
abdominal pain, and 80 percent had nausea and vomiting. Abdominal
tenderness was found in 70 percent, and abnormal bowel sounds noted in
only 55 percent. Plain abdominal radiographs following soluble contrast
showed evidence of obstruction in 90 percent of affected women. Plain
radiographs, however, are less accurate for diagnosing small-bowel
obstruction, and we and others have found that CT and MR imaging can be
diagnostic (Essilfie, 2007; Moliere, 2019). Colonoscopy can be both
diagnostic and therapeutic for colonic volvulus (Dray, 2012; Khan, 2012).
During pregnancy, mortality rates with obstruction can be excessive
because of difficult and thus delayed diagnosis, reluctance to operate during
pregnancy, and the need for emergency surgery (Firstenberg, 1998; Shui,
2011). In an older report of 66 pregnancies, Perdue and associates (1992)
described 6-percent maternal and 26-percent fetal mortality rates. Two of the

four women who died were in late pregnancy, and they had bowel
perforation from sigmoid or cecal volvulus caused by adhesions.

■ Colonic Pseudo-Obstruction
Also known as Ogilvie syndrome, pseudo-obstruction is caused by adynamic
colonic ileus. It is characterized by massive abdominal distention with cecal
and right-hemicolonic dilation (Fig. 57-3). Approximately 10 percent of all
cases are associated with pregnancy, and its reported frequency is 1 case in
1500 births (Reeves, 2015). The syndrome usually develops postpartum—90
percent after cesarean delivery—but it has been reported antepartum. In a
review, perforation was common, especially if the cecal diameter exceeded
12 cm (Jayaram, 2017). More recently, treatment with an IV infusion of
neostigmine, 2 mg, given during cardiac monitoring usually results in prompt
decompression (Song, 2018). In some cases, colonoscopic decompression is
performed, and in others, laparotomy is needed for perforation (Rawlings,
2010).

FIGURE 57-3 Ogilvie syndrome. Massive dilation of colon due to pseudo-obstruction in a woman
following cesarean delivery. A. Abdominal radiograph. B. Axial image from computed tomography.

■ Appendicitis
The lifetime incidence for appendicitis ranges from 7 to 10 percent (Flum,
2015). Thus, evaluation for possible appendicitis is relatively common
during pregnancy. Theilen and colleagues (2017) studied 171 such women
during a 5-year period, but only 14 women ultimately were found to have

pathologically confirmed appendicitis. After clinical and imaging evaluation,
the frequency of suspected appendicitis drops and that of confirmed
appendicitis in more than 8 million women ranged from 1 case in 1000 to
5500 births (Abbasi, 2014; Hée, 1999; Mazze, 1991).
It is repeatedly—and appropriately—emphasized that pregnancy makes
the diagnosis of appendicitis more difficult. Nausea and vomiting accompany
normal pregnancy, but also, as the uterus enlarges, the appendix commonly
moves upward and outward from the right lower quadrant (Baer, 1932;
Erkek, 2015; Pates, 2009). Another often-stated reason for late diagnosis is
that some degree of leukocytosis accompanies normal pregnancy. That said,
Theilen and coworkers (2017) observed that a white cell count >18,000/μL
made the diagnosis tenfold more likely. Neutrophilic shift is another
(Gentles, 2020). Pregnant women—especially in late gestation—frequently
do not have clinical findings “typical” for appendicitis. Thus, it commonly is
confused with cholecystitis, labor, pyelonephritis, renal colic, placental
abruption, or uterine leiomyoma degeneration.
Most reports indicate increasing morbidity and mortality rates with
advancing gestational age. And, as the appendix is progressively deflected
upward by the growing uterus, omental containment of infection becomes
increasingly unlikely. It is indisputable that appendiceal perforation is more
common during later pregnancy (Abbasi, 2014). In the studies by Andersson
(2001) and Ueberrueck (2004), the incidence of perforation was
approximately 8, 12, and 20 percent in successive trimesters.

Diagnosis
Persistent abdominal pain and tenderness are the most reproducible findings.
Right lower quadrant pain is the most frequent, although pain migrates
upward with appendiceal displacement (Mourad, 2000). For initial
evaluation, sonographic abdominal imaging is reasonable in suspected
appendicitis, even if to exclude an obstetrical cause of pain (Butala, 2010).
That said, graded compression sonography is difficult because of cecal
displacement and uterine imposition (Pedrosa, 2009). Appendiceal
computed tomography is more sensitive and accurate than sonography to
confirm suspected appendicitis (Katz, 2012; Raman, 2008). Specific views
can be designed to diminish fetal radiation exposure (Chap. 49, p. 873).

When available, MR imaging is the preferred modality for evaluation of
suspected appendicitis in pregnancy (Fig. 57-4). MR imaging has high
diagnostic yield and accuracy, and it also provides alternative diagnoses
(Fonseca, 2014; Theilen, 2015). One metaanalysis of 30 studies cited
positive- and negative-predictive values of 96 and 99.5 percent,
respectively, for MR imaging (Duke, 2016). Others report similar findings
(Burke, 2015; Kave, 2019). However, Aguilera and colleagues (2018) found
a sensitivity of only 18 percent in pregnant women.

FIGURE 57-4 Magnetic resonance T2 flair image of acute appendicitis in a midtrimester pregnancy.
The bright signal is inflammation and the block dot is a fecalith that can be seen in the midappendix
(arrow). The fetal trunk (T) and leg (L) and amnionic fluid (A) are seen within the gravid uterus
superior to the appendix. (Reproduced with permission by Dr. Christina Herrera.)

Management
When appendicitis is suspected, most recommend prompt surgical
exploration. Although diagnostic errors may lead to removal of a normal
appendix, surgical evaluation is preferable to postponed intervention and
generalized peritonitis (Abbasi, 2014). In earlier reports, the diagnosis was
verified in only 60 to 70 percent of pregnant women. As indicated above,

however, with CT and MR imaging, these figures have improved (Duke,
2016; Theilen, 2015). Still and importantly, the accuracy of diagnosis is
inversely proportional to gestational age.
Currently, laparoscopic resection is almost always used to treat
suspected appendicitis during the first two trimesters. In a report from a
Swedish database of nearly 2000 laparoscopic appendectomies, perinatal
outcomes were similar to those of more than 1500 open laparotomies done
before 20 weeks’ gestation (Reedy, 1997). Conversely, in their review,
Wilasrusmee and coworkers (2012) reported a higher rate of fetal loss with
laparoscopy. Authors of three more recent systematic reviews indicate that
the level of evidence is not strong enough to demonstrate a preferred
approach to appendectomy (Frountzas, 2019; Lee, 2019b; Walker, 2014). It
has evolved that in many centers, laparoscopic appendectomy is also
performed in most cases during the third trimester (Donkervoort, 2011). This
is encouraged by others, including the Society of American Gastrointestinal
and Endoscopic Surgeons (Pearl, 2017; Sekar, 2019; Soper, 2011).
Before exploration, IV antimicrobial therapy is begun, usually with a
second-generation cephalosporin or third-generation penicillin. Unless there
is gangrene, perforation, or a periappendiceal phlegmon, antimicrobial
therapy can usually be discontinued after surgery. Without generalized
peritonitis, the prognosis is excellent. Seldom is cesarean delivery indicated
at the time of appendectomy. Uterine contractions are common, and although
some clinicians recommend tocolytic agents, we do not. de Veciana (1994)
reported that tocolytic use substantially increased the risk for pulmonarypermeability edema caused by sepsis (Chap. 50, p. 883).

Antimicrobial versus Surgical Treatment
Because of European studies, some advocate that many cases of appendicitis
can be treated successfully with IV antimicrobials alone (Flum, 2015; Talan,
2019). In one study, 6 percent of pregnant women with appendicitis were
treated medically, and these gravidas had “considerably” elevated risks for
septic shock, peritonitis, and VTE compared with surgically managed cases
(Abbasi, 2014). In another study of 20 women, failure rate was 25 percent
(Joo, 2017). At this time, we discourage this practice until appropriate
studies have been done with pregnant women. Certainly, if elected, such
treatment should exclude women with obstructive appendicitis, and the
threshold to convert to surgical treatment must be low.

Pregnancy Outcomes
Appendicitis increases the likelihood of preterm labor, especially if
peritonitis has developed. Spontaneous labor after 23 weeks ensues with
greater frequency following surgery for appendicitis compared with surgery
for other indications (Ibiebele, 2019; Won, 2017). In one study, the fetal loss
rate was 22 percent if surgery was performed after 23 weeks’ gestation.
Three large population-based studies attest to the adverse outcomes from
appendicitis in pregnancy. From the California State Inpatient Database, the
fetal loss rate was 20 percent (Won, 2017). A nationwide study from Taiwan
found that risks for low birthweight and preterm delivery rose 1.5- to 2-fold
when outcomes in 908 women with acute appendicitis were compared with
those of controls (Wei, 2012). Last, an Australian population-based study
reported an almost twofold increased incidence of preterm birth following
appendectomy (Ibiebele, 2019).

REFERENCES
Abbasi N, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Management and outcomes of acute appendicitis in pregnancy
—population-based study of over 7000 cases. BJOG 121(12):1509, 2014
Aguilera F, Gilchrist BF, Farkas DT: Accuracy of MRI in diagnosing appendicitis during pregnancy. Am
Surg 84(8):1326, 2018
Alaniz V, Liss J, Metz TD, et al: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: a cause of refractory nausea and
vomiting in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1484, 2015
Albayrak M, Karatas A, Demiraran Y, et al: Ghrelin, acylated ghrelin, leptin, and PYY-3 levels in
hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(9):866, 2013
Al Maksoud AM, Barsoum AK, Moneer MM: Sigmoid volvulus during pregnancy: a rare non-obstetric
complication. Report of a case and review of the literature. Int J Surg Case Rep 17:51, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 189, January 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 775, April 2019
Andersson RE, Lambe M: Incidence of appendicitis during pregnancy. Int J Epidemiol 30:1281, 2001
Andolf E, Thorsell M, Käkkén K: Cesarean delivery and risk for postoperative adhesions and intestinal
obstruction: a nested case-control study of the Swedish Medical Birth Registry. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 203(4):406, 2010
Andrews KH, Bracero LA: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome during pregnancy: a case report. J
Reprod Med 60(9-10):430, 2015
Aouthmany A, Horattas MC: Ileal pouch perforation in pregnancy: report of a case and review of the
literature. Dis Colon Rectum 47:243, 2004
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Khashab MA, Chithadi KV, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for GI
endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 81(1):8, 2015

ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Saltzman JR, Cash BD, et al: Bowel preparation before
colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 81(4):781, 2015
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Shergill AK, Ben-Menachem T, et al: Guidelines for
endoscopy in pregnant and lactating women. Gastrointest Endosc 76(1):18, 2012
Bade K, Omundsen M: Caecal volvulus: a rare cause of intestinal obstruction in pregnancy. ANZ J Surg
84(4):298, 2014
Baer JL, Reis RA, Arens RA: Appendicitis in pregnancy with changes in position and axis of normal
appendix in pregnancy. JAMA 98:1359, 1932
Bandorski D, Kurniawan N, Baltes P, et al: Contraindications for video capsule endoscopy. World J
Gastroenterol 22(45):9898, 2016
Bartels SA, D’Hoore A, Cuesta MA, et al: Significantly increased pregnancy rates after laparoscopic
restorative proctocolectomy: a cross-sectional study. Ann Surg 256(6):1045, 2012
Beyer-Berjot L, Maggiori L, Birnbaum D, et al: A total laparoscopic approach reduces the infertility rate
after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis: a 2-center study. Ann Surg 258(2):275, 2013
Biertho L, Sebajang H, Bamehriz F, et al: Effect of pregnancy on effectiveness of laparoscopic Nissen
fundoplication. Surg Endosc 20:385, 2006
Billiauws L, Armengol Debeir L, Poullenot F, et al: Pregnancy is possible on long-term home parenteral
nutrition in patients with chronic intestinal failure: results of a long term retrospective observational
study. Clin Nutr 36(4):1165, 2017
Body C, Christie JA: Gastrointestinal diseases in pregnancy: nausea, vomiting, hyperemesis gravidarum,
gastroesophageal reflux disease, constipation, and diarrhea. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 45(2):267,
2016
Boelig RC, Barton SJ, Saccone G, et al: Interventions for treating hyperemesis gravidarum: a Cochrane
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(18):2492, 2018
Bokslag A, Jebbink J, De Wit L, et al: Intussusception during pregnancy after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass. BMJ Case Rep, November 18, 2014
Bortoli A, Pedersen N, Duricova D, et al: Pregnancy outcome in inflammatory bowel disease:
prospective European case-control ECCO-Epicom study, 2003–2006. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
34(7):724, 2011
Bosman WM, Veger HT, Hedeman Joosten PP, et al: Ileocaecal intussusception due to submucosal
lipoma in a pregnant woman. BMJ Case Rep 2014:pii:bcr2013203110, 2014
Boyd HA, Basit S, Harpsoe MC, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease and risk of adverse pregnancy
outcomes. PLoS One 10(6):e0129567, 2015
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th edition.
Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Brygger L, Fristrup CW, Harbo FS, et al: Acute gastric incarceration from thoracic herniation in
pregnancy following laparoscopic antireflux surgery. BMJ Case Rep 2013:pii: bcr2012008391, 2013
Burke KE, Haviland MJ, Hacker MR, et al: Indications for mode of delivery in pregnant women with
inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 23(5):721, 2017
Burke LM, Bashir MR, Miller FH, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of acute appendicitis in
pregnancy: a 5-year multiinstitutional study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:693.e1, 2015
Butala P, Greenstein AJ, Sur MD, et al: Surgical management of acute right lower-quadrant pain in
pregnancy: a prospective cohort study. J Am Coll Surg 211(4):491, 2010
Camilleri M, Murray JA: Diarrhea and constipation. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 261

Cape AV, Mogensen KM, Robinson MK, et al: Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC)
complications during pregnancy. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 38(5):595, 2014
Cappell MS: Risks versus benefits of gastrointestinal endoscopy during pregnancy. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol 8(11):610, 2011
Cedergren M, Brynhildsen, Josefsson A, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum that requires hospitalization and
the use of antiemetic drugs in relation to maternal body composition. Am J Obstet Gynecol
198:412.e1, 2008
Chaparro M, Verreth A, Lobaton T, et al: Long-term safety of in utero exposure to anti-TNFα drugs for
the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: results from the multicenter European TEDDY study.
Am J Gastroenterol 113(3):396, 2018
Chen X, Yang X, Cheng W: Diaphragmatic tear in pregnancy induced by intractable vomiting: a case
report and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(9):1822, 2012
Chey WD, Leontiadis GI, Howden CW, et al: ACG Clinical Guideline: Treatment of Helicobacter
pylori Infection. Am J Gastroenterol 112(2):212, 2017
Christodoulou-Smith J, Gold JI, Romero R, et al: Posttraumatic stress symptoms following pregnancy
complicated by hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(11):1307, 2011
Clark DH: Peptic ulcer in women. BMJ 1:1254, 1953
Cohen S, Harris LD: Does hiatus hernia affect competence of the gastroesophageal sphincter? N Engl J
Med 284(19):1053, 1971
Curran D, Lorenz R, Czako P: Gastric outlet obstruction at 30 weeks’ gestation. Obstet Gynecol 93:851,
1999
Davis MR, Bohon CJ: Intestinal obstruction in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 26:832, 1983
Dayangan Sayan C: A case of prolonged hyperemesis resulting in hepatorenal failure, foetal distress and
neonatal mortality. J Obstet Gynaecol 38(4):2018
Debby A, Golan A, Sadan O, et al: Clinical utility of esophagogastroduodenoscopy in the management of
recurrent and intractable vomiting in pregnancy. J Reprod Med 53:347, 2008
De Lima A, Galjart B, Wisse PH, et al: Does lower gastrointestinal endoscopy during pregnancy pose a
risk for mother and child?—a systematic review. BMC Gastroenterol 15:15, 2015
de Lima-Karagiannis A, Zelinkova-Detkova Z, van der Woude CJ: The effects of active IBD during
pregnancy in the era of novel IBD therapies. Am J Gastroenterol 111(9):1305, 2016
Del Valle J: Peptic ulcer disease and related disorders. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018,
p 2220
de Veciana M, Towers CV, Major CA, et al: Pulmonary injury associated with appendicitis in pregnancy:
who is at risk? Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(4):1008, 1994
Devroe S, Bleeser T, Van de Velde M, et al: Anesthesia for non-obstetric surgery during pregnancy in a
tertiary referral center: a 16-year retrospective, matched case-control, cohort study. Int J Obstet
Anesth 39:74, 2019
Di Gangi S, Gizzo S, Patrelli TS, et al: Wernicke’s encephalopathy complicating hyperemesis
gravidarum: from the background to the present. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(8):1499, 2012
Dominitz JA, Young JC, Boyko EJ: Outcomes of infants born to mothers with inflammatory bowel
disease: a population-based cohort study. Am J Gastroenterol 97:641, 2002
Donkervoort SC, Boerma D: Suspicion of acute appendicitis in the third trimester of pregnancy: pros
and cons of a laparoscopic procedure. JSLS 15(3):379, 2011
Dozois EJ, Wolff BG, Tremaine WJ, et al: Maternal and fetal outcome after colectomy for fulminant
ulcerative colitis during pregnancy: case series and literature review. Dis Colon Rectum 49:64, 2006

Dray X, Hamzi L, Lo Dico R, et al: Endoscopic reduction of a volvulus of the sigmoid colon in a
pregnancy woman. Dig Liver Dis 44(5):447, 2012
Duke E, Kalb B, Arif-Tiwari H, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic performance
of MRI for evaluation of acute appendicitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 206(3):508, 2016
DuPont HL: Acute infectious diarrhea in immunocompetent adults. N Engl J Med 370:1532, 2014
Duchesnay Inc.: Diclegis prescribing information. 2018. Available at:
https://files.duchesnay.com/duchesnay-usa/diclegis/diclegis-prescribing-information.pdf. Accessed
April 10, 2020
Erkek A, Anik Ilhan G, Yidixhan B, et al: Location of the appendix at the third trimester of pregnancy: a
new approach to old dilemma. J Obstet Gynaecol 35(7):688, 2015
Essilfie P, Hussain M, Stokes IM: Small bowel infarction secondary to volvulus during pregnancy: a case
report. J Reprod Med 52:553, 2007
Esteve-Solé A, Deyà-Martínez À, Teixidó I, et al: Immunological changes in blood of newborns exposed
to anti-TNF-α during pregnancy. Front Immunol 8:112, 2017
Farouk R, Pemberton JH, Wolff BG, et al: Functional outcomes after ileal pouch–anal anastomosis for
chronic ulcerative colitis. Ann Surg 231:919, 2000
Fassina G, Osculati A: Achalasia and sudden death: a case report. Forensic Sci Int 75:133, 1995
Feagins LA, Kane SV: Sexual and reproductive issues for men with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J
Gastroenterol 104(3):768, 2009
Fell DB, Dodds L, Joseph KS, et al: Risk factors for hyperemesis gravidarum requiring hospital
admission during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 107:277, 2006
Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Deb S, et al: Clinical management of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and
hyperemesis gravidarum across primary and secondary care: a population-based study. BJOG
126(10):1201, 2019
Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Gibson J, et al: Adverse maternal and birth outcomes in women admitted to
hospital for hyperemesis gravidarum: a population-based cohort study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol
32(1):40, 2018
Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Tata LJ: Hospital admission for hyperemesis gravidarum: a nationwide
study of occurrence, reoccurrence and risk factors among 8.2 million pregnancies. Hum Reprod
31(8):1675, 2016
Fill Malfertheiner S, Seelback-Göbel B, Costa SD, et al: Impact of gastroesophageal reflux disease
symptoms on the quality of life in pregnant women: a prospective study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
29(8):892, 2017
Firstenberg MS, Malangoni MA: Gastrointestinal surgery during pregnancy. Gastroenterol Clin North
Am 27:73, 1998
Flum DR: Acute appendicitis—appendectomy or the “antibiotics first” strategy. N Engl J Med 372:1937,
2015
Fogel EL, Sherman S: ERCP for gallstone pancreatitis. N Engl J Med 370:150, 2014
Folk JJ, Leslie-Brown HF, Nosovitch JT, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum: outcomes and complications
with and without total parenteral nutrition. J Reprod Med 49:497, 2004
Fonager K, Sorensen HT, Olsen J, et al: Pregnancy outcome for women with Crohn’s disease: a followup study based on linkage between national registries. Am J Gastroenterol 93:2426, 1998
Fonseca AL, Schuster KM, Kaplan LJ, et al: The use of magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of
suspected appendicitis in pregnancy: shortened length of stay without increase in hospital charges.
JAMA Surg 149(7):687, 2014

Fossum S, Halvorsen S, Vikanes ÅV, et al: Cardiovascular risk profile at the age of 40–45 women with
previous hyperemesis gravidarum or hypertensive disorders in pregnancy: a population-based study.
Pregnancy Hypertens 12:129, 2018
Fossum S, Vikanes Å, Naess Ø, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and long-term mortality: a populationbased cohort study. BJOG 124(7):1080, 2017
Foulon A, Dupas JL, Sabbagh C, et al: Defining the most appropriate delivery mode in women with
inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review. Inflamm Bowel Dis 23(5):712, 2017
Friedman S, Blumberg RS: Inflammatory bowel disease. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018,
p 2258
Frountzas M, Nikolaou C, Stergios K, et al: Is the laparoscopic approach a safe choice for the
management of acute appendicitis in pregnant women? A meta-analysis of observational studies.
Ann R Coll Surg Engl 101(4):235, 2019
Gentles JQ, Meglei G, Chen L, et al: Is neutrophilia the key to diagnosing appendicitis in pregnancy? Am
J Surg 219(5):855, 2020
Gerding DN, Johnson S. Clostridium difficile infection, including pseudomembranous colitis. In
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed.
New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 964
Getahun D, Fassett MJ, Longstreth GF, et al: Association between maternal inflammatory bowel disease
and adverse perinatal outcomes. J Perinatol 34(6):435, 2014
Giugale LE, Young OM, Streitman DC: Iatrogenic Wernicke encephalopathy in a patient with severe
hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1150, 2015
Goel B, Rani J, Huria A, et al: Perforated duodenal ulcer—a rare cause of acute abdomen in pregnancy.
J Clin Diagn Res 8(9):OD03, 2014
Goldberg D, Szilagyi A, Graves L: Hyperemesis gravidarum and Helicobacter pylori infection. Obstet
Gynecol 110:695, 2007
Gopal KA, Amshel AL, Shonberg IL, et al: Ostomy and pregnancy. Dis Colon Rectum 28:912, 1985
Grooten IJ, Koot MH, van der Post JA, et al: Early enteral tube feeding in optimizing treatment of
hyperemesis gravidarum: the Maternal and Offspring outcomes after Treatment of HyperEmesis by
Refeeding (MOTHER) randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nurt 106(3):812, 2017
Guglielmi FW, Baggio-Bertinet D, Federico A, et al: Total parenteral nutrition-related gastroenterological
complications. Digest Liver Dis 38:623, 2006
Gungor S, Gurates B, Aydin S, et al: Ghrelins, obestatin, nesfatin-1 and leptin levels in pregnant women
with and without hyperemesis gravidarum. Clin Biochem 46(9):828, 2013
Haggar F, Pereira G, Preen D, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in pregnancies following
colorectal cancer. Surg Endosc 27(7):2327, 2013
Hahnloser D, Pemberton JH, Wolff BG, et al: Pregnancy and delivery before and after ileal pouch-anal
anastomosis for inflammatory bowel disease: immediate and long-term consequences and outcomes.
Dis Colon Rectum 47:1127, 2004
Hansen AT, Erichsen R, Horváth-Puhó E, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease and venous
thromboembolism during pregnancy and the postpartum period. J Thromb Haemost 15(4):702, 2017
Hastie R, Bergman L, Cluver CA, et al: Proton pump inhibitor and preeclampsia risk among 157,720
women. Hypertension 73(5):1097, 2019
Hedström J, Nilsson J, Andersson R, et al: Changing management of gallstone-related disease in
pregnancy—a retrospective cohort analysis. Scan J Gastroenterol 52(9):1016, 2017

Hée P, Viktrup L: The diagnosis of appendicitis during pregnancy and maternal and fetal outcome after
appendectomy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 65:129, 1999
Hill JB, Yost NP, Wendel GW Jr: Acute renal failure in association with severe hyperemesis
gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 100:1119, 2002
Hoffer LJ, Bistrian BR, Driscoll DF: Enteral and parenteral nutrition. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper
DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2018, p 2324
Holmgren C, Aagaard-Tillery KM, Silver RM, et al: Hyperemesis in pregnancy: an evaluation of
treatment strategies with maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:56.e1, 2008
Hooft N, Schmidt ES, Bremner RM: Achalasia in pregnancy: botulinum toxin A injection of lower
esophageal sphincter. Case Rep Surg 2015:328970, 2015
Hor T, Lefevre JH, Shields C, et al: Female sexual function and fertility after ileal-anal pouch
anastomosis. Int J Colorectal Dis 31(3):593, 2016
Hux C: Ostomy and pregnancy. Ostomy Wound Manage 56(1):48, 2010
Hytten FE: The alimentary system. In Hytten F, Chamberlain G (eds): Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics.
London, Blackwell, 1991, p 137
Ibiebele I, Schnitzler M, Nippita T, et al: Appendicectomy during pregnancy and the risk of preterm
birth: a population data linkage study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 59(1):45, 2019
Jayaram P, Mohan M, Lindow S, et al: Postpartum acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvies’
Syndrome): a systematic review of case reports and case series. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
214:145, 2017
Joo JI, Park HC, Kim MJ, et al: Outcomes of antibiotic therapy of uncomplicated appendicitis in
pregnancy. Am J Med 130(12):1467, 2017
Julsgaard M, Christensen LA, Gibson PR, et al: Concentrations of adalimumab and infliximab in mothers
and newborns, and effects on infection. Gastroenterology 151:110, 2016
Julsgaard M, Hvas CL, Gearry RB, et al: Fecal calprotectin is not affected by pregnancy: clinical
implications for the management of pregnant patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 23(7):1240, 2017
Kahrilas PJ, Hirano I: Diseases of the esophagus. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2209
Kammerlander H, Nielsen J, Kjeldsen J, et al: The effect of disease activity on birth outcomes in a
nationwide cohort of women with moderate to severe inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel
Dis 23(6):1011, 2017
Kaplan YC, Richardson JL, Keskin-Arslan E, et al: Use of ondansetron during pregnancy and the risk
of major congenital malformations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Toxicol 86:1,
2019
Katz DS, Klein MA, Ganson G, et al: Imaging of abdominal pain in pregnancy. Radiol Clin North Am
50(1):149, 2012
Kave M, Parooie F, Salarzaei M: Pregnancy and appendicitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis on
the clinical us of MRI in diagnosis of appendicitis in pregnant women. World J Emerg Surg 14:37,
2019
Kawamura Y, Kawamata K, Shinya M, et al: Vitamin K deficiency in hyperemesis gravidarum as a
potential cause of fetal intracranial hemorrhage and hydrocephalus. Prenat Diagn 28:59, 2008
Khan MR, Ur Rehman S: Sigmoid volvulus in pregnancy and puerperium: a surgical and obstetric
catastrophe. Report of a case and review of the world literature. World J Emerg Surg 7(1):10, 2012

Khandelwal A, Fasih N, Kielar A: Imaging of the acute abdomen in pregnancy. Radiol Clin North Am
51:1005, 2013
Kho KA: Diagnostic and operative laparoscopy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Khudyak V, Lysy J, Mankuta D: Achalasia in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 61:207, 2006
Killeen S, Gunn J, Hartley J: Surgical management of complicated and medically refractory
inflammatory bowel disease during pregnancy. Colorectal Dis 19(2):123, 2017
Kleine I, Da Silva A, Ahmed W, et al: Hospital admission for hyperemesis gravidarum in women at
increased risk of spontaneous preterm birth. Birth 44(4):384, 2017
Koot MH, Boelig RC, Van’t Hooft J, et al: Variation in hyperemesis gravidarum definition and outcome
reporting in randomised clinical trials: a systematic review. BJOG 125(12):1514, 2018
Koren G: Treating morning sickness in the United States—changes in prescribing are needed. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 211(6):602, 2014
Koren G, Ornoy A, Berkovitch M: Hyperemesis gravidarum-is it a cause of abnormal fetal brain
development? Reprod Toxicol 79:84, 2018
Kurzel RB, Naunheim KS, Schwartz RA: Repair of symptomatic diaphragmatic hernia during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 71:869, 1988
Laine L, Jensen DM: Management of patients with ulcer bleeding Am J Gastroenterol 107(3):345, 2012
Lane AS, Stallworth JL, Eichelberger KY, et al: Vitamin K deficiency embryopathy from hyperemesis
gravidarum. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2015:324173, 2015
Lassey SC, Robinson JN: Rhabdomyolysis after hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 128(1):195,
2016
Lavecchia M, Chari R, Campbell S, et al: Ondansetron in pregnancy and the risk of congenital
malformations: a systematic review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(7):910, 2018
Lawson M, Kern F, Everson GT: Gastrointestinal transit time in human pregnancy: prolongation in the
second and third trimesters followed by postpartum normalization. Gastroenterology 89:996, 1985
Lee S, Crowe M, Seow CH, et al: The impact of surgical therapies for inflammatory bowel disease on
female fertility. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD012711, 2019a
Lee SH, Lee JY, Choi YY, et al: Laparoscopic appendectomy versus open appendectomy for suspected
appendicitis during pregnancy: a systematic review and updated meta-analysis. BMC Surg 19(1):41,
2019b
Lessa FC, Mu Y, Bamberg WM, et al: Burden of Clostridium difficile infection in the United States. N
Engl J Med 372(9):825, 2015
Lichtenstein GR, Loftus EV, Isaacs KL, et al ACG Clinical Guideline: management of Crohn’s disease
in adults. Am J Gastroenterol 113(4):481, 2018
Lichtenstein GR, Hanauer SB, Sandborn WJ, et al: Management of Crohn’s disease in adults. Am J
Gastroenterol 104(2):465, 2009
London V, Grube S, Sherer DM, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum: a review of recent literature.
Pharmacology 100(3-4):161, 2017
Ludvigsson JF, Lebwohl B, Ekbom A, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies for women undergoing endoscopy
while they were pregnant: a nationwide cohort study. Gastroenterology 152(3):2017
Luu M, Benzenine E, Doret M, et al: Continuous anti-TNFα use throughout pregnancy: possible
complications for the mother but not for the fetus—a retrospective cohort on the French national
health insurance database (EVASION). Am J Gastroenterol 113(11):1669, 2018

Lyell DJ: Adhesions and perioperative complications of repeat cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
205(6 Suppl):S11, 2011
Mahadevan U, Matro R: Care of the pregnant patient with inflammatory bowel disease. Obstet Gynecol
126(2):401, 2015
Mahadevan U, Robinson C, Bernasko N, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy clinical care
pathway: a report from the American Gastroenterological Association IBD Parenthood Project
Working Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):308, 2019
Mazze RI, Källén B: Appendectomy during pregnancy: a Swedish registry study of 778 cases. Obstet
Gynecol 77:835, 1991
McCarthy FP, Khashan AS, North RA, et al: A prospective cohort study investigating associations
between hyperemesis gravidarum and cognitive, behavioural and emotional well-being in pregnancy.
PLoS One 6(11):e27678, 2011
McCarthy FP, Murphy A, Khashan AS, et al: Day care compared with inpatient management of nausea
and vomiting of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):743, 2014
McDonald LC, Gerdin DN, Johnson S, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile
infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis 66(7):e1, 2018
McKenna D, Watson P, Dornan J: Helicobacter pylori infection and dyspepsia in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 102:845, 2003
McParlin C, O’Donnell A, Robson SC, et al: Treatments for hyperemesis gravidarum and nausea and
vomiting in pregnancy: a systematic review. JAMA 316(13):1392, 2016
Mehta N, Saha S, Chien EK, et al: Disorders of the gastrointestinal tract in pregnancy. In Powrie R,
Greene M, Camann W (eds): de Swiet’s Medical Disorders in Obstetric Practice, 5th ed. New
Jersey, Wiley-Blackwell, 2010, p 256
Ménassa M, Bergeron AM, Drolet S, et al: Strangulated congenital diaphragmatic hernia of Bochdalek
diagnosed in later pregnancy: a case report and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
41(10):1482, 2019
Meyerson S, Holtz T, Ehrinpresis M, et al: Small bowel obstruction in pregnancy. Am J Gastroenterol
90:299, 1995
Miller JP: Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy: a review. J R Soc Med 79:221, 1986
Mitchell-Jones N, Gallos I, Farren J, et al: Psychological morbidity associated with hyperemesis
gravidarum: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 124(1):20, 2017
Modigliani RM: Gastrointestinal and pancreatic disease. In Barron WM, Lindheimer MD, Davison JM
(eds): Medical Disorders of Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000, p 316
Moliere S, Cavillon V, Mesli Y: The case for magnetic resonance imaging in bowel obstruction during
pregnancy: intussusception in a pregnant woman with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 220(3):282, 2019
Mourad J, Elliott JP, Erickson L, et al: Appendicitis in pregnancy: new information that contradicts longheld clinical beliefs. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:1027, 2000
Mozaffari S, Abdolghaffari AH, Nikfar S, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with inflammatory
bowel disease following exposure to thiopurines and antitumor necrosis factor drugs: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Hum Exp Toxicol 35(5):445, 2015
Mullin PM, Ching C, Schoenberg R, et al: Risk factors, treatments, and outcomes associated with
prolonged hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(6):632, 2012
Nijsten K, van der Minnen L, Wiegers HM, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and vitamin K deficiency: a
systematic review. Br J Nutr July 30, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]

Norgård B, Hundborg HH, Jacobsen BA, et al: Disease activity in pregnant women with Crohn’s
disease and birth outcomes: a regional Danish cohort study. Am J Gastroenterol 102:1947, 2007
Nurmi M, Rautava P, Gissler M, et al: Recurrence patterns of hyperemesis gravidarum. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 219(5):469.e1, 2018
O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns L: Guidelines for prevention of intravascular catheter-related
infections. Clin Infect Dis 52(9):e162, 2011
Oliveira LG, Capp SM, You WB, et al: Ondansetron compared with doxylamine and pyridoxine for
treatment of nausea in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):735, 2014
O’Mahony S: Endoscopy in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 21:893, 2007
Oron G, Yogev Y, Shkolnik S, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease: risk factors for adverse pregnancy
outcome and the impact of maternal weight gain. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(112):2256, 2012
Oto A, Ernst R, Ghulmiyyah L, et al: The role of MR cholangiopancreatography in the evaluation of
pregnant patients with acute pancreaticobiliary disease. Br J Radiol 82(976):279, 2009
Oudman E, Wijnia JW, Oey M, et al: Wernicke’s encephalopathy in hyperemesis gravidarum: a
systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 236:84, 2019
Palacios-Marqués A, Delgado-Garcia S, Martín-Bayón T, et al: Wernicke’s encephalopathy induced by
hyperemesis gravidarum. BMJ Case Rep June 8, 2012
Pasternak B, Svanström M, Henrik A: Ondansetron in pregnancy and risk of adverse fetal outcomes. N
Engl J Med 368:814, 2013
Pates JA, Avendanio TC, Zaretsky MV, et al: The appendix in pregnancy: confirming historical
observations with a contemporary modality. Obstet Gynecol 114(4):805, 2009
Pearl J, Price R, Tonkin AE, et al: SAGES guidelines for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy. Surg
Endosc 31(10):3767, 2017
Pedrosa I, Lafornara M, Pandharipande PV, et al: Pregnant patients suspected of having acute
appendicitis: effect of MR imaging on negative laparotomy rate and appendiceal perforation rate.
Radiology 250(3):749, 2009
Peled Y, Melamed N, Hiersch L, et al: The impact of total parenteral nutrition support on pregnancy
outcome in women with hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(11):1146, 2014
Perdue PW, Johnson HW Jr, Stafford PW: Intestinal obstruction complicating pregnancy. Am J Surg
164:384, 1992
Porter H, Seeho S: Obstructed ileostomy in the third trimester of pregnancy due to compression from
the gravid uterus: diagnosis and management. BMJ Case Rep August 19, 2014
Poursharif B, Korst LM, Macgibbon KW, et al: Elective pregnancy termination in a large cohort of
women with hyperemesis gravidarum. Contraception 76:451, 2007
Raman SS, Osuagwu FC, Kadell B, et al: Effect of CT on false positive diagnosis of appendicitis and
perforation. N Engl J Med 358:972, 2008
Rawlings C: Management of postcaesarian Ogilvie’s syndrome and their subsequent outcomes. Aust N
Z J Obstet Gynaecol 50(6):573, 2010
Reddy D, Murphy SJ, Kane SV, et al: Relapses of inflammatory bowel disease during pregnancy: inhospital management and birth outcomes. Am J Gastroenterol 103:1203, 2008
Reedy MB, Kallen B, Kuehl TJ: Laparoscopy during pregnancy: a study of five fetal outcome
parameters with use of the Swedish Health Registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:673, 1997
Reeves M, Frizelle F, Wakeman C, et al: Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction in pregnancy. ANZ J Surg
85(10):728, 2015
Riddle MS, DuPont HL, Connor BA: ACG Clinical Guideline: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention of
Acute Diarrheal Infections in Adults. Am J Gastroenterol 111(5):602, 2016

Rigler LG, Eneboe JB: Incidence of hiatus hernia in pregnant women and its significance. J Thorac Surg
4:262, 1935
Riis L, Vind I, Politi P, et al: Does pregnancy change the disease course? A study in a European cohort
of patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol 101:1539, 2006
Robinson D, Walker R, Adams SC, et al: American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
(ASPEN) Definition of Terms, Style, and Conventions Used in ASPEN Board of Directors–
Approved Documents. 2018. Available at:
http://www.nutritioncare.org/Guidelines_and_Clinical_Resources/Clinical_Practice_Library/Special_
Reports/. Accessed April 10, 2020
Rocha-Castro J, Kronbauer K, Dalle J, et al: Characteristics of bacterial acute diarrhea among women.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 132(3):302, 2016
Rosen C, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Mishkin DS, et al: Management and outcomes of peptic ulcer disease in
pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(9):1368, 2021
Rubin DT, Ananthakrishnan AN, Siegel CA, et al: ACG Clinical Guideline: ulcerative colitis in adults.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2019 Mar;114(3):384
Ruiter-Ligeti J, Vincent S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Risk factors, incidence, and morbidity associated
with obstetric clostridium difficile infection. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):387, 2018
Russo-Stieglitz KE, Levine AB, Wagner BA, et al: Pregnancy outcome in patients requiring parenteral
nutrition. J Matern Fetal Med 8:164, 1999
Saeedi BJ, Morison DG, Kraft CS, et al: Fecal microbiota transplant for clostridium difficile infection in
a pregnant patient. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):507, 2017
Saha S, Loranger D, Pricolo V, et al: Feeding jejunostomy for the treatment of severe hyperemesis
gravidarum: a case series. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 33(5):529, 2009
Sakai M, Yoneda S, Sasaki Y, et al: Maternal total parenteral nutrition and fetal subdural hematoma.
Obstet Gynecol 101:1142, 2003
Savas N: Gastrointestinal endoscopy in pregnancy. World J Gastroenterol 20(41):15241, 2014
Schrag SP, Sharma R, Jaik NP, et al: Complications related to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
(PEG) tubes: a comprehensive clinical review. J Gastrointest Liver Dis 16:407, 2007
Schwentner L, Wulff C, Kreienberg R, et al: Exacerbation of a maternal hiatus hernia in early
pregnancy presenting with symptoms of hyperemesis gravidarum: case report and review of the
literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283(3):409, 2011
Sekar H, Rajesh Thamaran N, Stoker D, et al: Should the laparoscopic approach be the norm for
appendicectomy in the third trimester of pregnancy? BMJ Case Rep 12:e228192, 2019
Senturk MB, Yildiz G, Yildiz P, et al: The relationship between hyperemesis gravidarum and maternal
psychiatric well-being during and after pregnancy: controlled study. J Matern Fetal neonatal Med
30(11):1314, 2017
Serra AE, Fong A, Chung H: A gut-wrenching feeling: pregnancy complicated by massive ventral
hernia with bowel obstruction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(1):79, 2014
Shand AW, Chen JS, Selby W, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy: a population-based study
of prevalence and pregnancy outcomes. BJOG 123(11):1862, 2016
Sharifah H, Naidu A, Vimal K: Diaphragmatic hernia: an unusual cause of postpartum collapse. BJOG
110:701, 2003
Shui LH, Rafi J, Corder A, et al: Mid-gut volvulus and mesenteric vessel thrombosis in pregnancy: case
report and literature review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283 (Suppl 1):39, 2011
Song LMK, Topazian M: Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018

Soper NJ: SAGES’ guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, and use of laparoscopy for surgical problems
during pregnancy. Surg Endosc 25:3477, 2011
Spiliopoulos D, Spiliopoulos M, Awala A: Esophageal achalasia: an uncommon complication during
pregnancy treated conservatively. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2013(639698):1, 2013
Sridharan K, Sivaramakrishnan G: Interventions for treating hyperemesis gravidarum: a network metaanalysis of randomized clinical trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(8):1405, 2020
Stephens A, Patel K, Rao A, et al: Recurrent Wernicke’s encephalopathy in pregnancy: a case report.
Nutr Neurosci 22(7):528, 2019
Stern MD, Kopylov U Ben-Horin S, et al: Magnetic resonance enterography in pregnant women with
Crohn’s disease: case series and literature review. BMC Gastroenterol 14:146, 2014
Stokke G, Gjelsvik BL, Flaatten KT, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum, nutritional treatment by nasogastric
tube feeding: a 10-year retrospective cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(4):359, 2015
Sun S, Qiu X, Zhou J: Clinical analysis of 65 cases of hyperemesis gravidarum with gestational transient
thyrotoxicosis. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40 (6):1567, 2014
Swallow BL, Lindow SW, Masson EA, et al: Psychological health in early pregnancy: relationship with
nausea and vomiting. J Obstet Gynaecol 24:28, 2004
Swartzlander TK, Carlan SJ, Locksmith G, et al: Sonographic confirmation of the correct placement of a
nasoenteral tube in a woman with hyperemesis gravidarum: case report. J Clin Ultrasound 41(Suppl
1):18, 2013
Takahashi K, Funayama Y, Fukushima K, et al: Pregnancy and delivery in patients with enterostomy due
to anorectal complications from Crohn’s disease. Int J Colorectal Dis 22:313, 2007
Talan DA, Saltzman DJ, DeUgarte DA, et al: Methods of conservative antibiotic treatment of acute
uncomplicated appendicitis: a systematic review. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 86(4):722, 2019
Tan PC, Norazilah MJ, Omar SZ: Dextrose saline compared with normal saline rehydration of
hyperemesis gravidarum: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 121(2 Pt1):291, 2013
Theilen LH, Mellnick VM, Longman RE, et al: Utility of magnetic resonance imaging for suspected
appendicitis in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 12(3):345, 2015
Theilen LH, Mellnick VN, Shanks AL, et al: Acute appendicitis in pregnancy: predictive clinical factors
and pregnancy outcomes. Am J Perinatol 34(6):523, 2017
Ueberrueck T, Koch A, Meyer L, et al: Ninety-four appendectomies for suspected acute appendicitis
during pregnancy. World J Surg 28:508, 2004
Unal A, Sayherman SE, Ozel L, et al: Acute abdomen in pregnancy requiring surgical management: a
20-case series. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 159(1):87, 2011
Vaknin Z, Halperin R, Schneider D, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and nonspecific abnormal EEG
findings. J Reprod Med 51:623, 2006
Vandraas KF, Vikanes AV, Vangen S, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and birth outcomes-a populationbased cohort study of 2.2 million births in the Norwegian Birth Registry. BJOG 120(13):1654, 2013
Verberg MF, Gillott JD, Fardan NA, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum, a literature review. Hum Reprod
Update 11:527, 2005
Vikanes AV, Stoer NC, Magnus P, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and pregnancy outcomes in the
Norwegian mother and child cohort—a cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 13:169, 2013
Vogel T, Wrobel RM, Graupner O, et al: Esophageal achalasia and pregnancy: own observations in 43
patients and a review of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 298(3):511, 2018
Walch A, Duke M, Autry T, et al: Profound hypokalaemia resulting in maternal cardiac arrest: a
catastrophic complication of hyperemesis gravidarum? Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2018:4687587,
2018

Walker HG, Al Samaraee A, Mills SJ, et al: Laparoscopic appendicectomy in pregnancy: a systematic
review of the published evidence. Int J Surg 12(11):1235, 2014
Wax JR, Pinette MG, Cartin A: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass-associated bowel obstruction complicating
pregnancy—an obstetrician’s map to the clinical minefield. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):265, 2013
Wei PL, Keller JJ, Liang HH, et al: Acute appendicitis and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a nationwide
population-based study. J Gastrointest Surg 16(6):1204, 2012
Weyermann M, Brenner H, Adler G, et al: Helicobacter pylori infection and the occurrence and
severity of gastrointestinal symptoms during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:526, 2003
Whang B: Thoracic surgery in the pregnant patient. Thorac Surg Clin 28(1):1, 2018
White S, Byrne J, McIntire DD, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum: can factors predict risk of readmission?
Abstract No. 21L. Presented at 2018 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Annual
Clinical and Scientific Meeting. April 27–30, 2018
Wilasrusmee C Sukrat B, McEvoy M, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of safety laparoscopic
versus open appendectomy for suspected appendicitis in pregnancy. Br J Surg 99(11):1470, 2012
Won RP, Friedlander S, Lee SL: Management and outcomes of appendectomy during pregnancy. Am
Surg 83(10):1103, 2017
Wong CS, Jelacic S, Habeeb RL, et al: The risk of the hemolytic-uremic syndrome after antibiotic
treatment of Escherichia coli O157:H7 infections. N Engl J Med 342(26):1930, 2000
Woolfson K, Cohen Z, McLeod RS: Crohn’s disease and pregnancy. Dis Colon Rectum 33:869, 1990
Worthington P, Balint J, Bechtold M, et al: When is parenteral nutrition appropriate? JPEN J Parenter
Enteral Nutr 41(3):324, 2017
Ye GY, Li N, Chen YB, et al: Clostridium difficile carriage in healthy pregnant women in China.
Anaerobe 37:54, 2016
Ye P, Zhao N, Shu J, et al: Laparoscopy versus open surgery for adnexal masses in pregnancy: a metaanalytic review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 299(3):625, 2019
Yost NP, McIntire DD, Wians FH Jr, et al: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of corticosteroids for
hyperemesis due to pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 102:1250, 2003
Zara G, Codemo V, Palmieri A, et al: Neurological complications in hyperemesis gravidarum. Neurol Sci
33(1):133, 2012

