CHAPTER 25

Obstetrical Analgesia and Anesthesia

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
ANALGESIA AND SEDATION DURING LABOR
NERVE BLOCKS
NEURAXIAL ANALGESIA
SPINAL (SUBARACHNOID) BLOCK
EPIDURAL ANALGESIA
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
REFERENCES
Obstetrical anesthesia presents unique challenges. Labor begins without
warning, and anesthesia may be required within minutes of a full meal.
Vomiting with aspiration of gastric contents is a constant threat. The usual
physiological adaptations of pregnancy require special consideration,
especially with disorders such as preeclampsia, placental abruption, or
sepsis.
Obstetrical analgesia and anesthesia have become extraordinarily safe
over the past 40 years (Hawkins, 2011). Anesthetic-related maternal
mortality rates decreased more than 60 percent during this time, and from
2007 to 2017, only 0.4 percent of 6765 maternal deaths were due to
anesthesia complications (Petersen, 2019). Creanga and colleagues (2017)
reported the contribution of anesthetics to pregnancy-associated deaths has

declined markedly in the United States (Fig. 25-1). Approximately two thirds
of deaths associated with general anesthesia were caused by induction
problems or intubation failures during cesarean delivery. Deaths associated
with regional analgesia were caused by spinal or epidural blocks reaching
higher than planned spinal levels—26 percent; respiratory failure—19
percent; and drug reaction—19 percent.

FIGURE 25-1 Contribution of anesthetic complications to pregnancy-associated deaths—United
States, 1987–2013.

Of factors contributing to improved obstetrical anesthesia safety, the
increased use of regional analgesia for labor and delivery is the most
significant. For general anesthesia, the improved case-fatality rate is
especially notable considering that this method is now used for the highestrisk patients and for emergencies with decision-incision intervals <15
minutes (Bloom, 2005). In addition, the incidence of aspiration, hypoxia, or
other respiratory events has declined during the past three decades. This is
likely due to use of difficult-airway algorithms, advanced airway equipment,
and increased in-house anesthesia staffing (Davies, 2017; Lim, 2018).
Despite these encouraging results with general anesthesia, rising
complications with regional analgesia techniques are now reported (Davies,
2017).

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
■ Obstetrical Anesthesia Services

Every obstetrician should be proficient in local and pudendal analgesia for
select circumstances. However, it is preferable for an anesthesiologist or
anesthetist to provide rapid and reliable pain relief to allow the obstetrician
to focus attention on the laboring woman and her fetus.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016) have reaffirmed prior
directives that a woman’s request for labor pain relief is sufficient indication
for its provision. Identification of any of the risk factors shown in Table 25-1
should prompt consultation and collaboration with anesthesia personnel. The
resulting plan should ideally minimize the need for emergency anesthesia in
this high-risk group.
TABLE 25-1. Maternal Factors That May Prompt Anesthetic Consultation

Goals for optimizing obstetrical anesthesia services have been
established by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019b) and the American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016). To achieve
these goals, the following is a partial list of requisites:
1. Availability of a licensed practitioner credentialed to administer an
appropriate anesthetic whenever necessary and to maintain support of vital
functions in an obstetrical emergency
2. Availability of anesthesia personnel to permit the start of cesarean
delivery within 30 minutes of the decision to perform the procedure

(decision–incision time)
3. Anesthesia personnel immediately available to support an emergency
cesarean delivery during the active labor of a woman attempting vaginal
birth after prior cesarean (Chap. 31, p. 578)
4. Appointment of a qualified anesthesiologist to be responsible for all
anesthetics administered
5. Availability of a qualified physician with obstetrical privileges to perform
operative vaginal or cesarean delivery during anesthesia administration
6. Availability of equipment, facilities, and support personnel equal to that
provided in a surgical suite
7. Immediate availability of personnel, other than the surgical team, to
assume responsibility for resuscitation of a depressed newborn (Chap. 32,
p. 586).
To meet these goals, 24-hour in-house anesthesia staffing is usually
necessary. Providing such service in smaller facilities is more challenging.
This is underscored by the fact that approximately 40 percent of all hospitals
providing obstetrical care have fewer than 500 deliveries per year
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Bell and coworkers (2000)
calculated the financial burden that may be incurred to provide 24/7
obstetrical anesthesia coverage. They concluded that such coverage could not
operate profitably at their tertiary referral institution, given the average
indemnity and Medicaid reimbursement for labor epidural analgesia.
Compounding this burden, some third-party payers have denied
reimbursement for epidural analgesia in the absence of a specific medical
indication—an approach repudiated by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b).

■ Principles of Pain Relief
Labor pain caused by uterine contractions and cervical dilation is transmitted
through visceral afferent sympathetic nerves entering the spinal cord from T10
through L1. Later, perineal stretching transmits painful stimuli through the
pudendal nerve and sacral nerves from S2 through S4. Cortical responses to
pain and anxiety are complex and may be influenced by multiple factors.

Labor pain is a highly individual response to variable stimuli that are
uniquely received and interpreted (Hawkins, 2010). These stimuli are
modified by emotional, motivational, cognitive, social, and cultural
circumstances. Specific modifiers are maternal expectations for her
childbirth experience, age, antepartum labor education, and quality of
emotional support. Major causes of dissatisfaction with pain relief are
perceived labor pain and delay in ameliorating the pain (Yurashevich, 2019).
A mother’s physiological responses to labor pain may influence maternal
and fetal well-being and labor progress. First, a higher metabolic rate leads
to more oxygen consumption and the resultant hyperventilation may induce
hypocarbia. Second, the sympathetic nervous system response to pain leads
to elevated circulating catecholamine levels. These in turn raise cardiac
output and vascular resistance, which may raise maternal blood pressure.
Catecholamines also directly can adversely affect uterine activity and
uteroplacental blood flow. Last, pain, stress, and anxiety cause release of
stress hormones such as cortisol and endorphins. Effective analgesia
attenuates or eliminates these responses.

ANALGESIA AND SEDATION DURING LABOR
If uterine contractions cause discomfort, pain relief with a narcotic such as
meperidine, plus an antiemetic tranquilizer such as promethazine, is
appropriate. With a successful program of analgesia and sedation, discomfort
usually is felt at the acme of a uterine contraction, and the mother can rest
quietly between contractions. Appropriate drug selection and administration
from the medications shown in Table 25-2 safely accomplishes these
objectives.
TABLE 25-2. Typical Parenteral Analgesic Agents for Labor Pain

■ Parenteral Agents
Meperidine and Promethazine
Meperidine, 50 to 100 mg, with promethazine, 25 mg, may be administered
intramuscularly (IM) at intervals of 2 to 4 hours. Analgesia is maximal 30 to
45 minutes after an IM injection. An almost immediate effect is achieved by
giving meperidine intravenously (IV) in doses of 25 to 50 mg every 1 to 2
hours. In an earlier study, meperidine was found to be the most common
opioid used worldwide for pain relief in labor (Bricker, 2002). Tsui and
associates (2004) found meperidine to be superior to placebo for pain relief
in the first stage of labor. In a randomized investigation at Parkland Hospital,
IV patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) with meperidine was found to be an
inexpensive and reasonably effective method for labor analgesia (Sharma,
1997). Women received 50-mg meperidine with 25-mg promethazine IV as
an initial bolus. Thereafter, an infusion pump was set to deliver 15 mg of
meperidine every 10 minutes as needed until delivery. Neonatal sedation, as
measured by need for naloxone treatment in the delivery room, was identified
in 3 percent of newborns.
Meperidine readily crosses the placenta, and its depressant effect in the
fetus closely follows peak maternal analgesia. The active metabolite of
meperidine, normeperidine, has a half-life of approximately 72 hours in the
neonate. Therefore, other opioids discussed below are favored for labor
analgesia. (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).

Butorphanol

This synthetic opioid-receptor agonist-antagonist narcotic, given in 1- to 2mg IV doses every 4 hours as needed, compares favorably with meperidine
for labor analgesia. Its major side effects are somnolence, dizziness, and
dysphoria. Neonatal respiratory depression is less than with meperidine.
Importantly, the two drugs are not given contiguously because butorphanol
antagonizes the narcotic effects of meperidine. Hatjis and Meis (1986)
described a transient sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern following butorphanol
administration, but no short-term maternal or neonatal adverse sequelae were
noted (Chap. 24, p. 451).

Fentanyl
This short-acting and potent synthetic opioid may be given in doses of 50 to
100 µg IV every hour. Its main disadvantage is a short duration of action,
which requires frequent dosing or use of a PCA pump. Atkinson and
coworkers (1994) reported that butorphanol provided better initial analgesia
than fentanyl and was associated with fewer requests for additional
medication or for epidural analgesia.

Remifentanil
This ultrashort-acting opioid can be given using a PCA pump (see Table 252). Remifentanil is administered through a dedicated IV cannula to avoid
bolus dosing, which can lead to apnea. Both respiratory monitoring and 1:1
nursing-to-patient ratio help watch for apneic spells, which occur in 25
percent of treated women (Stocki, 2014). In the RemiPCA SAFE Network
Study, moderate maternal hypoxia (SaO2 <94 percent) was documented in a
fourth of women (Melber, 2019). A multicenter randomized study showed
PCA-administered remifentanil halved the proportion of women
subsequently requesting epidural analgesia compared with IM meperidine
(Wilson, 2018).

Parenteral Agent Safety
Parenteral sedation is not without risks. Hawkins and colleagues (1997)
reported that 4 of 129 maternal anesthetic-related deaths were from such
sedation. One was from aspiration, two from inadequate ventilation, and one
from overdosage.

Narcotics used during labor may cause newborn respiratory depression.
Naloxone is a narcotic antagonist capable of reversing respiratory
depression induced by opioid narcotics. It acts by displacing the narcotic
from specific receptors in the central nervous system. After adequate
ventilation has been established, naloxone may be given to a newborn whose
mother received narcotics. Naloxone is contraindicated in a newborn of a
narcotic-addicted mother because withdrawal symptoms may be precipitated
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017).

■ Nitrous Oxide
A self-administered mixture of 50-percent nitrous oxide (N2O) and oxygen
may provide satisfactory analgesia during labor (Zafirova, 2018). Some
preparations are premixed in a single cylinder (Entonox), and in others, a
blender mixes the two gases from separate tanks (Nitronox). The gases are
connected to a breathing circuit through a valve that opens only when the
patient inspires. The use of intermittent nitrous oxide did not alter the rate of
epidural analgesia but did improve birth experience satisfaction rates (Bobb,
2016; Lim, 2018). Maternal side effects include nausea, vomiting, dizziness,
and drowsiness. Neonatal Apgar scores or umbilical cord blood gas results
did not differ in women using nitrous oxide compared with those selecting
other pain management methods or no analgesia in labor (Likis, 2014).

NERVE BLOCKS
Various nerve blocks provide pain relief during labor and/or delivery. These
include pudendal, paracervical, and neuraxial blocks such as spinal,
epidural, dural-puncture epidural, and combined spinal-epidural techniques.

■ Anesthetic Agents
Commonly used nerve block anesthetics are summarized in Table 25-3. The
dose of each agent varies widely and is dependent on the particular nerve
block and physical status of the woman. The onset, duration, and quality of
analgesia can be enhanced by increasing the anesthetic agent’s dose,
concentration, and volume or by altering its delivery mode. With their use,

safety tenets include incremental boluses of the agent and carefully
monitoring for early warning signs of adverse effects. Appropriate equipment
and personnel to manage these reactions must be immediately available.
TABLE 25-3. Commonly Used Local Anesthetic Agents in Obstetrics

Local analgesic agents are manufactured in more than one concentration
and ampule size, and this raises the potential for dosing errors. Most often,
serious toxicity follows inadvertent intravenous, subarachnoid, or subdural
injection. Systemic toxicity from local anesthetics typically manifests in the
central nervous and cardiovascular systems. For this reason, before epidural
analgesia is initiated, a mixture of a small amount of local anesthetic drug
and epinephrine is given as a test dose. Epinephrine with its associated
tachycardia is used as a marker to help identify incorrect placement if it
occurs. A sudden significant elevation in the maternal heart rate or blood
pressure within 1 to 2 minutes after administration suggests intravenous
catheter placement. A block extending over wider than expected spinal
levels and/or dense motor blockade indicate inadvertent catheter placement
into the subarachnoid or into the subdural space.

Central Nervous System Toxicity
Early symptoms are those of stimulation, but as serum levels rise,
depression follows. Symptoms may include light-headedness, dizziness,

tinnitus, metallic taste, and numbness of the tongue and mouth. Patients may
also show bizarre behavior, slurred speech, and muscle fasciculation and
excitation. Ultimately, generalized convulsions and loss of consciousness
could result.
For neural and cardiac toxicity treatment, a rapid IV infusion of 20percent intralipids effectively disassociates anesthetic drugs from neural and
myocardial cell membranes. For patients weighing >70 kg, a 100-mL bolus
dose of lipid emulsion is given. Boluses can be repeated once or twice every
5 minutes for persistent cardiac instability. The initial bolus is followed by a
200-mL infusion over 15 minutes (Neal, 2018).
For convulsions, an airway is established, and oxygen delivered. To halt
seizures, lorazepam, 4 mg IV slowly, is administered and may be repeated
once after 10 to 15 minutes. Alternatively, diazepam, 5 to 10 mg IV every 10
to 15 minutes up to a total dose of 30 mg, can be used. Succinylcholine
abolishes the peripheral manifestations of the convulsions and allows
tracheal intubation. Magnesium sulfate, administered according to the
regimen for eclampsia, also controls convulsions (Chap. 41, p. 719).
Abnormal fetal heart rate patterns such as late decelerations or persistent
bradycardia may develop from maternal hypoxia and lactic acidosis. With
arrest of convulsions, oxygen administration, and other supportive measures,
the fetus usually recovers more quickly in utero than following immediate
cesarean delivery. Moreover, the mother is better served if delivery is
delayed until the intensity of hypoxia and metabolic acidosis has diminished.

Cardiovascular Toxicity
These manifestations generally develop later than those from cerebral
toxicity, and they may not develop at all because they are induced by higher
serum drug levels. The exception is bupivacaine, which is associated with
the development of neurotoxicity and cardiotoxicity at virtually identical
levels (Catterall, 2018). Fortunately, bupivacaine is mostly used in dilute
epidural solutions, and use of 0.75-percent solution is limited to a small dose
for spinal analgesia. Similar to neurotoxicity, cardiovascular toxicity is
characterized first by stimulation and then by depression. Accordingly,
hypertension and tachycardia are soon followed by hypotension, cardiac
arrhythmias, and impaired uteroplacental perfusion. As before, 20-percent
intralipids serve as the rescue.

Hypotension is managed initially by turning the woman onto either side to
avoid aortocaval compression. A crystalloid solution is infused rapidly
along with vasopressors. Emergency bedside cesarean delivery is
considered if maternal vital signs have not been restored within 4 minutes of
cardiac arrest, and the goal is delivery within 5 minutes (Chap. 50, p. 897).
However, as with convulsions, the fetus is likely to recover more quickly in
utero once maternal cardiac output is reestablished.

■ Pudendal Block
Pain with vaginal delivery arises from stimuli from the lower genital tract.
These are transmitted primarily through the pudendal nerve, the peripheral
branches of which provide sensory innervation to the perineum, anus, vulva,
and clitoris (Chap. 2, p. 21). The pudendal nerve passes beneath the
posterior surface of the sacrospinous ligament just as the ligament attaches to
the ischial spine. Sensory nerve fibers of the pudendal nerve are derived
from ventral branches of the S2 through S4 nerves.
The pudendal nerve block is a relatively safe, simple method of
analgesia for vaginal delivery (Sultan, 2021). As shown in Figure 25-2, a
tubular introducer is used to sheath and guide a 15-cm, 22-gauge needle into
position near the pudendal nerve. The end of the introducer is placed against
the vaginal mucosa just beneath the tip of the ischial spine. The introducer
allows 1.0 to 1.5 cm of needle to protrude beyond its tip, and the needle is
pushed beyond the introducer tip into the mucosa. A mucosal wheal is made
with 1 mL of 1-percent lidocaine solution or an equivalent dose of another
local anesthetic (see Table 25-3). To guard against intravascular infusion,
aspiration is attempted before this and all subsequent injections. The needle
is then advanced until it touches the sacrospinous ligament, which is
infiltrated with 3 mL of lidocaine. The procedure is repeated on the other
side.

FIGURE 25-2 Local infiltration of the pudendal nerve. Transvaginal technique showing the needle
extended beyond the needle guard and passing through the sacrospinous ligament to reach the pudendal
nerve.

Within 3 to 4 minutes of injection, the successful pudendal block will
allow pinching of the lower vagina and posterior vulva without pain. If
delivery occurs before the pudendal block becomes effective and an
episiotomy is indicated, the fourchette, perineum, and adjacent vagina can be
infiltrated with 5 to 10 mL of 1-percent lidocaine solution directly at the
planned episiotomy site. The pudendal block usually has become effective by
the time of repair.
The maximum recommended total dose of lidocaine is 4.5 mg/kg and not
to exceed 300 mg (see Table 25-3). For a 50-kg woman, this would equal
225 mg (4.5 mg/kg × 50 kg). Thus, if 1-percent lidocaine is used, the
calculated allowed amount would be: 225 mg ÷ 10 mg/mL = 22.5 mL. Of
note, for any drug solution, 1 percent = 10 mg/mL.

Pudendal block usually does not provide adequate analgesia when
delivery requires extensive obstetrical manipulation. Parenteral or neuraxial
anesthesia is usually necessary when complete visualization of the cervix and
upper vagina or manual exploration of the uterine cavity is indicated.
Infrequently, complications may follow this block. As previously
described, intravascular injection of a local anesthetic agent may cause
serious systemic toxicity. Hematoma formation from perforation of a blood
vessel is most likely when there is a coagulopathy (Lee, 2004). The addition
of a corticosteroid injected along with the local anesthetic did not decrease
the incidence of pudendal neuralgia at 3 months (Labat, 2017). Rarely,
severe infection may originate at the injection site. The infection may spread
posteriorly to the hip joint, into the gluteal musculature, or into the retropsoas
space (Svancarek, 1977).

■ Paracervical Block
The cervix, vagina, and uterus are richly supplied by nerves of the
uterovaginal plexus (Fig. 2-12, p. 25). This plexus lies within the connective
tissue lateral to the uterosacral ligaments. Thus, injections are most effective
if placed immediately lateral to the insertion of the uterosacral ligaments into
the uterus (Rogers, 1998). For paracervical blockade, usually 1-percent
lidocaine or 3-percent chloroprocaine, 5 to 10 mL, is injected into the cervix
laterally at 4 and 8 o’clock positions. This block usually provides
satisfactory pain relief during first-stage labor. However, because the
pudendal nerves are not blocked, additional analgesia is required for
delivery. The block may have to be repeated during labor because these
anesthetics are relatively short acting.
Fetal bradycardia is a worrisome complication that develops in
approximately 15 percent of these blocks (Rosen, 2002). Bradycardia
usually develops within 10 minutes and may last up to 30 minutes. Doppler
studies have shown an increase in the pulsatility index of the uterine arteries
following paracervical blockade (Chap. 14, p. 262). These observations
support the hypothesis of drug-induced arterial vasospasm as a cause of fetal
bradycardia (Manninen, 2000). Thus, paracervical block should not be used
in situations of potential fetal compromise. For all of these reasons, we do
not use this block at Parkland Hospital.

NEURAXIAL ANALGESIA
■ Neuraxial Regional Blocks
Epidural, spinal, dural-puncture epidural, or combined spinal-epidural
techniques are the most common methods used for relief of pain during labor
and/or delivery in the United States. Nearly 75 percent of mothers receive
neuraxial anesthesia for pain relief (Butwick, 2018a). Among first births, 68
percent of women who delivered vaginally received neuraxial pain relief
compared with 57 percent of women delivering their second or higher
number child. Antepartum education programs improve the understanding of
labor analgesia and increase its use by 30 percent in Hispanic women who
traditionally choose labor epidural analgesia less often (Togioka, 2019).
Butwick and associates (2018b) showed women are more likely to receive
neuraxial analgesia with higher class of obesity—class I, 72 percent; class II,
73 percent; and class III, 76 percent.
As a brief review, the epidural space lies just outside the dural sac. The
dura mater encases the subarachnoid space, which contains the cauda equina
of the spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (Fig. 25-3). Spinal and
intrathecal anesthesia are synonymous, and agents are injected into the
subarachnoid space.

FIGURE 25-3 Neuraxial analgesia. A. Combined spinal-epidural analgesia. B. Epidural analgesia.

Epidural analgesia via a catheter in the epidural space is typically used
for relief of labor pain, although it can also be used for anesthesia during
operative vaginal and cesarean delivery. Spinal analgesia is typically given
as a single intrathecal injection of a local anesthetic at the time of operative
vaginal or cesarean delivery. Variations of these two basic approaches are
described in the subsequent sections.

■ Spinal (Subarachnoid) Block
Introduction of a local anesthetic into the subarachnoid space to effect
analgesia offers a short procedural time, rapid blockade onset, and high
success rate of inducing analgesia. The subarachnoid space is smaller during
pregnancy likely because of internal vertebral venous plexus engorgement
(see Fig. 25-3A). As a result, compared with nonpregnant women, the same
amount of anesthetic agent in the same volume of solution produces a higherlevel blockade in parturients.

Vaginal Delivery
Spinal analgesia involving only lower spinal levels can be used for
operative vaginal delivery. The level of analgesia should extend to the T10
dermatome, which corresponds to the level of the umbilicus. Blockade to this
level provides excellent relief from the pain of uterine contractions. The
spinal block provides also excellent analgesia to the lower uterine segment,
vagina, and perineum.
Several local anesthetic agents have been used for spinal analgesia (see
Table 25-3). Addition of dextrose to any of these agents creates a hyperbaric
solution, which is heavier and denser than CSF. A sitting position causes a
hyperbaric solution to settle caudally, whereas a lateral position will have a
greater effect on the dependent side. Lidocaine given in a hyperbaric solution
produces excellent analgesia and has the advantage of a rapid onset and
relatively short duration. Isobaric bupivacaine provides satisfactory
analgesia for more than 1 hour. Single-dose spinal analgesia is usually
administered when the cervix is fully dilated, and all other criteria for safe
operative vaginal delivery have been fulfilled (Chap. 29, p. 533).
Preanalgesic IV hydration with 1 L of crystalloid solution will prevent or
minimize hypotension in many cases.

Cesarean Delivery
A level of sensory blockade extending to the T4 dermatome is desired for
cesarean delivery. A dose of 10 to 12 mg of bupivacaine in a hyperbaric
solution is administered. The addition of 20 to 25 µg of fentanyl improves the
quality and prolongs the duration of the spinal block, reduces shivering, and

minimizes referred pain. In addition, 0.1 to 0.2 mg of intrathecal morphine
can be added for pain control postoperatively.
With intrathecal morphine, the risk for respiratory depression should be
considered. The Society of Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
recommends postoperative respiratory monitoring based on dose, patient risk
factors, and perioperative risk factors. A low-dose regimen, defined as >50
µg and ≤150 µg, in women with no risk factors requires respiratory rate and
sedation checks postoperatively for the first 12 hours. In women with
additional risk factors, these safeguards are conducted postoperatively for
the first 24 hours, and additional monitoring with pulse oximetry or
capnography is considered. Last, this monitoring method is also
recommended in all women receiving doses >150 µg (Bauchat, 2019).

Complications
Shown in Table 25-4 are some of the more common complications
associated with neuraxial analgesia.
TABLE 25-4. Complications of Neuraxial Analgesia

Hypotension. This common complication may develop soon after injection of
the local anesthetic agent. It stems from vasodilation caused by sympathetic

blockade and is compounded by obstructed venous return due to uterine
compression of the vena cava. In the supine position, even in the absence of
maternal hypotension, placental blood flow may still be significantly
diminished. Treatment includes uterine displacement by left lateral patient
positioning, rapid IV crystalloid infusion, and IV vasopressors.
One systematic review concluded that vasopressors should be given only
in the setting of hypotension (Fitzgerald, 2020). For treatment, phenylephrine
is now the preferred drug to treat hypotension from neuraxial analgesia. It is
a pure alpha agonist and raises blood pressure solely through
vasoconstriction. Maternal bradycardia develops more frequently with
phenylephrine than with ephedrine or norepinephrine (Sharkey, 2019; Veeser,
2012). Although ephedrine was believed to correct hypotension without
reducing blood flow, phenylephrine is associated with better umbilical cord
blood gases (Ngan Kee, 2017). A metaanalysis of 36 randomized trials also
suggests that both agents have comparable efficacy but that phenylephrine
yields a lower rate of fetal acidosis (Xu, 2018). For administration,
prophylactic infusions of phenylephrine are effective and may require less
physician intervention compared with intermittent boluses (Ngan Kee, 2004).
As another potential agent, norepinephrine may improve cardiac output with
its beta-adrenergic effects but also is associated with a lower cord arterial
pH compared with phenylephrine (Chen, 2021; Mohta, 2019).
High Spinal Blockade. Most often, complete spinal blockade follows
administration of an excessive dose of local anesthetic. However, it can also
develop with inadvertent delivery of a small amount of local anesthetic drugs
into the subdural space. This small potential space lies between the dura
mater and arachnoid mater and outside the subarachnoid space. Because of
its limited capacity, even small volumes will reach higher spinal levels.
Hypotension and apnea develop quickly and must be immediately treated to
prevent cardiac arrest. In the undelivered woman: (1) the uterus is
immediately displaced laterally to minimize aortocaval compression, (2)
effective ventilation is established, preferably with tracheal intubation, and
(3) IV fluids and vasopressors are given to correct hypotension.
Postdural Puncture Headache. Leakage of CSF from the dural puncture site
can lead to postdural puncture headache. Presumably, when the woman sits
or stands, the diminished CSF volume creates traction on pain-sensitive

central nervous system structures. An alternative mechanism is compensatory
cerebral vasodilation in response to CSF loss—the Monro-Kellie hypothesis
(Mokri, 2001).
The incidence of obstetrical postdural puncture headache in women
undergoing spinal analgesia ranges from 0.2 to 1 percent (Maronge, 2012;
Sprigge, 2008). This rate is similar to the overall occurrence of postdural
puncture headaches, which approximates 1 headache per 200 blocks. A study
of 567 postpartum hospital encounters showed that 40 percent of
presentations for headache are due to neuraxial anesthesia, and these visits
most often occur within 7 days of delivery (Rodriguez, 2020).
Procedural preventive steps include using a small-gauge spinal needle
and avoiding multiple punctures. In a prospective, randomized study of five
different spinal needles, Sprotte and Whitacre needles had the lowest risks of
associated postdural puncture headaches (Vallejo 2000). Rates are high with
inadvertent dural puncture during epidural analgesia and approximate 0.2 to
1 percent (Introna, 2012; Maronge, 2018). No strong evidence supports
placing a woman flat on her back or providing vigorous hydration to prevent
headache (Arevalo-Rodriguez, 2016). A prophylactic blood patch performed
within 24 hours of dural puncture does not diminish either the incidence of
postdural puncture headache or the need for a subsequent therapeutic blood
patch (Scavone, 2004).
If a headache develops, administration of caffeine, which is a cerebral
vasoconstrictor, has limited efficacy (Katz, 2017). With severe headache, an
epidural blood patch is most effective and preferred treatment. Autologous
blood is obtained aseptically by venipuncture, and 10 to 20 mL is injected
into the epidural space at or below the site of dural puncture. This site is
selected because the blood will spread more readily in the cephalad
direction. Further CSF leakage is halted by either mass effect or clot
formation. Relief is immediate, and complications are uncommon.
If a headache does not have the pathognomonic postural characteristics or
persists despite treatment with a repeat blood patch, other diagnoses should
be considered. Chisholm and Campbell (2001) described a case of superior
sagittal sinus thrombosis that manifested as a postural headache. Chan and
Paech (2004) reported persistent CSF leak in three women. Smarkusky and
colleagues (2006) described pneumocephalus, which caused immediate
cephalgia. Last, intracranial and intraspinal subarachnoid hematomas have
developed after spinal analgesia (Bi, 2021; Maronge, 2018; Moore, 2019).

Convulsions. Rarely, postdural puncture cephalgia is associated with
temporary blindness and convulsions. Shearer and associates (1995)
described eight such cases in 19,000 regional analgesia procedures done at
Parkland Hospital. It is presumed that these also are caused by hypotension
from CSF leak. Immediate treatment of seizures and epidural blood patch
were usually effective.
Bladder Dysfunction. With neuraxial analgesia, bladder sensation is likely to
be obtunded and bladder emptying impaired for several hours after delivery.
As a consequence, bladder distention is a frequent postpartum complication,
especially if appreciable volumes of IV fluid are given. Millet (2012)
randomized 146 women with neuraxial analgesia to either intermittent or
continuous bladder catheterizations and found that the intermittent method
was associated with significantly greater rates of bacteriuria.
Arachnoiditis and Meningitis. Local anesthetics used for neuraxial blocks are
required to be free of methylparaben or other preservatives. This practice,
coupled with aseptic technique and disposable equipment, has made
meningitis and arachnoiditis rare (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2010; Maronge, 2018).

Contraindications to Spinal Analgesia
Shown in Table 25-5 are absolute contraindications to spinal analgesia.
Obstetrical complications that are associated with maternal hypovolemia and
hypotension—for example, severe hemorrhage—are contraindications to
spinal blockade. The additive deleterious cardiovascular effects of spinal
blockade plus acute blood loss in nonpregnant patients have been
documented (Kennedy, 1968).
TABLE 25-5. Absolute Contraindications to Spinal Analgesia

Severe preeclampsia is another obstetrical complication in which
decreased blood pressure can be encountered when neuraxial analgesia is
used (Wallace, 1995). These effects are mitigated by judicial dosing of
anesthetic solutions. Perhaps related, Ulubaşoğlu and colleagues (2018)
reported that preeclamptic women undergoing general anesthesia required
more antihypertensive medication than those with spinal analgesia.
Disorders of coagulation that result in poor hemostasis also preclude the
use of neuraxial analgesia. Women with a bleeding diathesis such as von
Willebrand disease or hemophilias carry an increased risk for subarachnoid
hematoma formation (Chap. 59, p. 1062). Rare subdural hematomas may
mimic postdural puncture headaches (Lim, 2016). However, neuraxial
analgesia can be safely performed in these patients following factor
replacement and normalization of levels (Choi, 2009; Katz, 2015). As
discussed earlier, these patients should receive consultation with an
anesthesiologist prior to labor.
The use of anticoagulation to prevent or treat venous thromboembolism is
frequently encountered during the peripartum period. No randomized studies
guide the management of anticoagulation at the time of delivery, but
consensus opinion is provided by the Society for Anesthesia and
Perinatology (Leffert, 2018). Briefly, women receiving >10,000 units/d of
unfractionated heparin are individually assessed regarding timing and dose
of last injection. Thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin
(LMWH) should have a 12-hour delay. Therapeutic doses of LMWH merit a
24-hour delay. This is discussed further in Chapter 55 (p. 985). Spinal
analgesia is also contraindicated if there is infection at the needle entry site.
Other maternal conditions may pose relative contraindications to
neuraxial analgesia. Many women with neurological disorders such as Chiari

malformation or pseudotumor cerebri may be candidates for neuraxial
analgesia after consultation with an anesthesiologist and neurologist. Women
with severe aortic stenosis or pulmonary hypertension also have a relative
contraindication to spinal analgesia due to the deleterious effects of
hypotension and diminished preload and afterload (Chap. 52, p. 926).

■ Epidural Analgesia
Relief of labor and childbirth pain, including cesarean delivery, can be
accomplished by injection of a local anesthetic agent into the epidural space
(see Fig. 25-3B). This potential space contains areolar tissue, fat,
lymphatics, and the internal vertebral venous plexus. Entry for obstetrical
analgesia is usually through a lumbar intervertebral space. Although only one
injection may be given, usually an indwelling catheter is placed for
subsequent bolus administration or continuous infusion (Billingham, 2018).
Infusions use a volumetric pump controlled either by the patient or by a
caregiver. Under appropriate physician supervision, labor and delivery
nursing personnel with specific training in the management of epidural
infusions should be able to adjust dosage and also discontinue infusions.

■ Continuous Lumbar Epidural Analgesia
Complete analgesia for the pain of labor and vaginal delivery necessitates a
block from the T10 to the S4 dermatomes. For cesarean delivery, a block
extending from the T4 to the S1 dermatomes is desired. The effective spread
of anesthetic depends upon the catheter tip location and the dose,
concentration, and volume of anesthetic agent used. Individual variations in
anatomy or synechiae or septa in the epidural space may preclude a
completely satisfactory block. Last, the catheter tip may migrate from its
original location during labor.

Technique
One example of the sequential steps and techniques for performance of
epidural analgesia is detailed in Table 25-6. Before injection of the local
anesthetic therapeutic dose, a test dose is given containing small amounts of
lidocaine and epinephrine. The woman is observed for features of toxicity

from intravascular injection and for signs of either subarachnoid or subdural
injection. If these are absent, analgesia is initiated with a full dose of the
anesthetic alone. Analgesia is maintained by a continuous infusion or by
programmed intermittent boluses delivered by infusion pump (Billingham,
2018). The addition of a short-acting, lipid-soluble narcotic—fentanyl or
sufentanil—lowers the required amount of local anesthetic drug needed to
achieve analgesia. This helps preserve motor function (Lyons, 1997). One
popular regimen is 0.0625- to 0.125-percent bupivacaine with 2-µg/mL
fentanyl.
TABLE 25-6. Technique for Labor Epidural Analgesia

As with spinal blockade, close monitoring, including the level of
analgesia, must be performed by trained personnel. Appropriate resuscitation
equipment, drugs, and personnel must be available during administration of
epidural analgesia.

Complications
As shown in Table 25-4, certain problems are inherent to epidural analgesia.

High Spinal Blockade. Dural puncture with inadvertent and unrecognized
either subarachnoid or subdural injection may cause total spinal blockade. In
a study of more than 18,000 women, the incidence of recognized accidental
dural puncture at the time of epidural analgesia was 0.91 percent (Sprigge,
2008). Management of this complication is described earlier (p. 474).
Ineffective Analgesia. Using currently popular continuous or intermittent
epidural infusion regimens, 90 percent of women rate their pain relief as
good to excellent (Sharma, 1997). In a study of almost 2000 parturients, Hess
and associates (2001) found that 12 percent complained of three or more
episodes of pain or pressure. Its efficacy was more likely to decrease with
rising body mass index (Dresner, 2006). Inadequate analgesia may result in
patient dissatisfaction. Catheter replacement should be considered.
Moreover, a poorly functioning epidural catheter cannot be used for
additional dosing of local anesthetic drugs for intrapartum cesarean delivery.
Such conversion of labor epidural analgesia to cesarean delivery anesthesia
has an approximately 20 percent failure rate. This necessitates placement of
a new regional block or general anesthesia (Mankowitz, 2016). In a Maternal
Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network study, 4 percent of women initially
given epidural analgesia required a general anesthetic for cesarean delivery
(Bloom, 2005).
Also at times, perineal analgesia for vaginal delivery is difficult to
obtain, especially when lower volumes of epidural local anesthetic drugs are
used. With this situation, additional doses can be given, or a pudendal block
may be added.
Hypotension. Sympathetic blockade from epidurally injected analgesic
agents may cause peripheral vasodilation with resulting hypotension and
diminished cardiac output. Hypotension is more common—20 percent—in
women with an admission pulse pressure <45 mm Hg compared with 6
percent in those whose pulse pressure is >45 mm Hg (Miller, 2013). Pulse
pressure is calculated by subtracting diastolic from systolic blood pressure
measurements. Obese women also have significantly higher rates of
hypotension (Vricella, 2011). In normal gravidas, hypotension induced by
epidural analgesia usually can be prevented by rapid IV infusion of 500 to
1000 mL of crystalloid solution as described for spinal analgesia.
Maintaining a lateral position also minimizes hypotension. Despite these

precautions, hypotension is the most frequent side effect and is severe enough
to require treatment in a third of women (Sharma, 1997).
Central Nervous Stimulation. Convulsions are an uncommon but serious
complication. Described earlier, the immediate management involves
infusion of 20-percent intralipids and treatment with lorazepam or diazepam
(p. 470).
Fever. Some women develop intrapartum fever following epidural analgesia.
Many studies are limited by the inability to control for other risk factors,
such as labor length, duration of ruptured membranes, and number of vaginal
examinations. With this in mind, the frequency of intrapartum fever
associated with epidural analgesia is 10 to 15 percent above the baseline
rate (Lieberman, 2002).
The two general theories concerning the etiology of maternal
hyperthermia are maternal-fetal infection or dysregulation of body
temperature (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
A study of placental histopathology in women given epidural analgesia
identified intrapartum fever only when there was placental inflammation
(Dashe, 1999). This suggests that fever is due to infection. Sharma (2014)
randomized 400 nulliparas with labor epidural analgesia to receive 2 g
cefoxitin prophylactically versus placebo. It was hypothesized that epiduralrelated fever was due to infection and that prophylactic antimicrobials
should significantly reduce the rate of fever. Approximately equal
proportions—40 percent—of women developed fever ≥38°C during labor.
This result suggests that infection is unlikely to cause the fever associated
with epidural analgesia during labor. Whatever the mechanism, women with
persistent fever are usually treated with antimicrobials for presumed
chorioamnionitis.
The other proposed mechanisms include alteration of the hypothalamic
thermoregulatory set point, impaired peripheral thermoreceptor input to the
central nervous system with selective blockade of warm stimuli, or
imbalance between heat production and heat loss. Del Arroyo and colleagues
(2019) suggested that bupivacaine blocks release of antipyretic interleukins.
Back Pain. An association between epidural analgesia and back pain has
been reported by some. In a prospective cohort study, Butler and Fuller

(1998) reported that back pain after delivery was common with epidural
analgesia, however, persistent pain was infrequent. Based on their systematic
review, Lieberman and O’Donoghue (2002) concluded that available data do
not support an association between epidural analgesia and development of de
novo, long-term backache.
Miscellaneous Complications. A spinal or epidural hematoma is a rare
complication of an epidural catheter (Grant, 2007). These are considered
neurological emergencies, and treatment is usually surgical. Epidural
abscesses are rare, and the most common pathogen is Staphylococcus aureus
(McQuaid, 2018). These may be managed conservatively with IV antibiotics,
but surgical intervention may be necessary. For both conditions, timely
neurosurgical consultation is important. Uncommonly, the plastic epidural
catheter is sheared off (Noblett, 2007). Computed tomography can localize
the retained fragment. For a tip left in the epidural space, surveillance is
reasonable in the absence of symptoms. With neurological changes or with
fragments in the subarachnoid space, neurosurgical consultation is
recommended (Mitra, 2007). Last, an association of epidural analgesia and
autism spectrum disorder seems unlikely (Mikkelsen, 2021).

Effect on Labor
Most studies, including five combined randomized trials from Parkland
Hospital shown in Table 25-7, report that epidural analgesia prolongs labor
and increases the use of oxytocin stimulation (Sharma, 2004). Alexander and
associates (2002) examined the effects of epidural analgesia on the Friedman
(1955) labor curve (Chap. 22, p. 424). There were 459 nulliparas randomly
assigned to receive patient-controlled epidural analgesia or patientcontrolled IV meperidine. Compared with original Friedman criteria,
epidural analgesia prolonged the active phase of labor by 1 hour. In a cohort
study, similar labor durations were observed for both spinal-epidural and
epidural analgesia (Poma, 2019).
TABLE 25-7. Selected Labor Events in 2703 Nulliparous Women
Randomized to Epidural Analgesia or Intravenous Meperidine Analgesia

The effect of labor epidural on the second stage is unclear. Prolongation
of the second stage was particularly true in earlier studies, at a time when
higher concentrations of local anesthetic drugs were used. This association
has been attributed to local-anesthetic-induced motor blockade and resultant
impaired maternal expulsive efforts. Chestnut and associates (1999) reported
that, with epidural analgesia, operative vaginal delivery occurred more
frequently because of prolonged second-stage labor. In a systematic review,
Anim-Somuah and colleagues (2018) reported that epidural analgesia
prolongs the first stage by 32 minutes and the second stage by 15 minutes.
Craig and coworkers (2015) randomly assigned 310 nulliparous women with
labor epidural analgesia to receive 0.125-percent bupivacaine plus fentanyl
or epidural fentanyl alone during second-stage labor. Epidural bupivacaine
analgesia did cause motor blockade during the second stage, however, the
duration of the second stage was not longer. Neither obstetrical nor neonatal

outcomes were different between the two groups. Patient satisfaction was
high with both methods.
Fetal Heart Rate. Hill and associates (2003) examined the effects of epidural
analgesia with 0.25-percent bupivacaine on fetal heart rate patterns.
Compared with IV meperidine, no worrisome effects were identified.
Reduced beat-to-beat variability and fewer accelerations were more
common in fetuses whose mothers received meperidine (Chap. 24, p. 450).
Based on their systematic review, Reynolds and coworkers (2002) reported
that epidural analgesia was associated with improved neonatal acid-base
status compared with meperidine.
Cesarean Delivery Rates. A contentious issue in the past was whether
epidural analgesia increased the risk for cesarean delivery. Early evidence
that it did was from an era when dense motor blockade resulted from high
concentrations of local anesthetic agents. Now however, with the
administration of dilute anesthetic solutions, the risk for cesarean delivery is
not increased.
Several studies conducted at Parkland Hospital were designed to answer
this and related questions. From 1995 to 2002, a total of 2703 nulliparas at
term and in spontaneous labor were enrolled in five trials to evaluate
epidural analgesia techniques compared with IV meperidine. The results
from these are summarized in Table 25-8 and show that epidural analgesia
does not significantly raise cesarean delivery rates (Sharma, 2004). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and the
American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016) also conclude that epidural
analgesia is not associated with a greater cesarean delivery rate.
TABLE 25-8. Cesarean Delivery (CD) Rates in Laboring Women
Receiving Epidural Analgesia or Intravenous Meperidine

Timing of Epidural Placement. Earlier studies indicated that epidural
placement in early labor was linked to a higher risk of cesarean delivery
(Lieberman, 1996; Rogers, 1999; Seyb, 1999). These observations prompted
at least five randomized trials, which showed that the timing of epidural
placement has no effect on the risk of cesarean birth, forceps delivery, or
fetal malposition (Chestnut, 1994a,b; Luxman, 1998; Ohel, 2006; Wong,
2005, 2009). Thus, withholding epidural placement until some arbitrary
cervical dilation has been attained serves only to deny women maximal labor
pain relief.

Safety
Among nearly 20,000 women who received epidural analgesia in the MFMU
Network study cited earlier, no anesthesia-related maternal deaths were
reported (Bloom, 2005). Ruppen and colleagues (2006) reviewed data from
27 studies involving 1.4 million pregnant women who received epidural
analgesia. Their calculated adverse-event rates were 1:145,000 for deep
epidural infection, 1:168,000 for epidural hematoma, and 1:240,000 for
persistent neurological injury. More recently, the Society for Obstetric
Anesthesia and Perinatology established the Serious Complication
Repository Project (D’Angelo, 2014). During a 5-year period, more than
228,000 women had neuraxial analgesia. There were no maternal deaths
related to anesthesia, but two each were attributed to cardiac arrest and
myocardial infarction. There were four cases of epidural abscess or

meningitis, 58 high-spinal-level neuraxial blocks (1 in 4000), 27
neurological injuries, and 16 respiratory arrests (1 in 10,000).

Contraindications
As with spinal analgesia, contraindications are listed in Table 25-5.
Thrombocytopenia. Although low platelet counts are intuitively worrisome,
the level at which epidural bleeding might develop is unknown. Epidural
hematomas are rare, and their incidence was estimated to be 0 to 0.6 percent
in women whose platelet count is <70,000/µL (Goodier, 2015; Lee, 2017).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and
Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatalogy (Bauer, 2021) have
concluded that women with a platelet count of ≥70,000/µL may be
candidates for neuraxial analgesia.
Anticoagulation. Women receiving anticoagulation therapy who are given
regional analgesia are at increased risk for spinal cord hematoma and
compression (Chap. 55, p. 985). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019b) has concluded the following:
1. With prophylactic unfractionated heparin (UFH) in a dose of 5000 units
twice daily, regional analgesia is not contraindicated.
2. With an intermediate dose of UFH (7500 to 10,000 units), it is likely low
risk to proceed with neuraxial analgesia at a point more than 12 hours after
the last dose.
3. With a high dose of UFH (>20,000 units), it is likely low risk to use
regional analgesia at a point more than 24 hours after the last dose if the
activate partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is within normal range or the
anti-Xa level is undetectable.
4. With thromboprophylaxis with LMWH, needle or catheter placement or
removal should be delayed 12 hours or more.
5. With treatment doses of LMWH, placement or removal of a neuraxial
catheter should be delayed for 24 hours.
Severe Preeclampsia-Eclampsia. Concerns with neuraxial analgesia in
women with severe preeclampsia include hypotension as well as
hypertension from pressor agents given to correct hypotension. Additionally,

pulmonary edema may follow infusion of large volumes of crystalloid. These
risks are outweighed by the disadvantages of general anesthesia (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist, 2020). Of these, tracheal
intubation may be difficult because of upper airway edema. Also, general
anesthesia can lead to severe, sudden hypertension that can cause pulmonary
or cerebral edema or intracranial hemorrhage.
With improved techniques for infusion of dilute local anesthetics into the
epidural space, most have come to favor epidural blockade for labor and
delivery in women with severe preeclampsia. In a study from Parkland
Hospital, Lucas and associates (2001) randomly assigned 738 women with
hypertension to epidural analgesia or patient-controlled IV analgesia during
labor. A standardized protocol for prehydration, incremental epidural
administration, and ephedrine use was employed. They concluded that labor
epidural analgesia was safe in women with hypertensive disorders.
Thrombocytopenia is seen with severe preeclampsia complicated by
hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count—HELLP
syndrome (Chap. 40, p. 689). Discussed earlier and in general, it seems safe
to use neuraxial techniques if the platelet count is ≥70,000/µL (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b, 2020).
Women with severe preeclampsia can have remarkably diminished
intravascular volume compared with normal pregnancy (Zeeman, 2009).
Conversely, total body water volume is increased because of the capillary
leak caused by endothelial cell activation (Chap. 40, p. 693). This imbalance
is manifested as pathological peripheral edema, proteinuria, ascites, and
total lung water. For all of these reasons, aggressive volume replacement
raises the risk for pulmonary edema, especially in the first 72 hours
postpartum (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
In one study, 3.5 percent of women with severe preeclampsia developed
pulmonary edema when preloaded without a protocol limit to the volume
infused (Hogg, 1999).
The risk of pulmonary edema can be reduced or obviated with judicious
prehydration—usually with 500 to 1000 mL of crystalloid solution.
Specifically, in the study by Lucas and colleagues (2001) cited earlier, no
instances of pulmonary edema developed among the women in whom the
infused crystalloid preload volume was limited to 500 mL. Moreover,
vasodilation produced by epidural blockade is less abrupt if the analgesia
level is achieved slowly with dilute solutions of local anesthetic agents.

With vigorous IV crystalloid therapy, cerebral edema also may develop
(Chap. 40, p. 701. Last, most cases of pharyngolaryngeal edema are related
to aggressive volume therapy (Heller, 1983).

■ Epidural Opioid Analgesia
Opioids alone usually will not provide adequate analgesia, and they are often
used as an adjunct to a local anesthetic agent such as bupivacaine (Wang,
2020). This combination lowers the local anesthetic drug concentration
needed to achieve analgesia, which in turn creates a less dense motor
blockade. Other benefits are rapid onset of pain relief and a decrease in
shivering. Common side effects include pruritus and urinary retention.
Nalbuphine, a mixed opioid agonist/antagonist, will abolish these symptoms
without affecting the analgesic action. When neuraxial morphine is given for
postoperative pain, monitoring for respiratory depression is necessary as
discussed earlier (p. 472) (Bauchat, 2019).

■ Combined Spinal–Epidural Techniques
The combination of spinal and epidural techniques (CSE) has risen in
popularity and may provide rapid and effective analgesia for labor and then
for cesarean delivery. An epidural needle is first placed in the epidural
space. A small-gauge spinal needle is then introduced through the epidural
needle into the subarachnoid space—this is called the needle-throughneedle technique (see Fig. 25-3A). A single bolus of an opioid, a local
anesthetic, or sometimes a combination is injected into the subarachnoid
space. A subarachnoid opioid bolus results in the rapid onset of profound
pain relief with virtually no motor blockade (Poma, 2019). The spinal needle
is withdrawn, and an epidural catheter is then placed into the epidural space.
The epidural catheter remains and permits repeated analgesia dosing.
Miro and associates (2008) compared epidural analgesia with CSE
analgesia for labor in 6497 women and found the overall outcomes and
complications to be similar. Poma and coworkers (2019) also found
comparable analgesia results with epidural or CSE techniques. They noted
that subarachnoid sufentanil was associated with lower uterine contractility,
but labor duration was not affected. A greater incidence of fetal heart rate
abnormalities related to uterine hypertonus has been reported with CSE

analgesia (Abrão, 2009; Beamon, 2014). The analgesia failure rate is 11.6
percent for traditional labor epidural and 6.6 percent for CSE (Booth, 2016).
Although CSE provides a faster onset of labor analgesia, the intrathecal
injection of local anesthetic drugs and/or narcotic may cause hypotension and
pruritus.

■ Continuous Spinal Analgesia During Labor
The technique of continuous spinal analgesia for relief of labor pain is
seldom used because of postdural puncture headaches (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). With redesigned needles and
catheters, Arkoosh (2008) randomized 429 women to either continuous
spinal or conventional epidural analgesia during labor. Complication rates
between these two neuraxial techniques did not differ.

■ Dural-Puncture Epidural Analgesia
Gaining popularity, this technique is similar to CSE, but initial steps differ.
First, a single dural puncture is made using a 25-gauge spinal needle placed
through the epidural needle shaft (see Fig. 25-3A). No anesthetic is injected,
but the needle can help confirm correct subarachnoid space placement by the
drip of CSF from its distal hub. After removal of the spinal needle, the
epidural catheter is threaded into the epidural space (see Fig. 25-3B). The
dural puncture allows for a small amount of local anesthetic drugs to be
translocated from the epidural space to the subarachnoid space. This aids a
faster onset of pain relief than traditional epidural analgesia. Without the
intrathecal injection, dural-puncture epidural analgesia is associated with
fewer side effects than CSE analgesia and provides better block quality than
an epidural (Chau, 2017). A review of five studies with 581 patients showed
dural puncture epidural technique was associated with a faster onset of
analgesic effects, a reduction in provider-initiated boluses “top-ups,” and
better sacral coverage. The incidence of post-dural puncture headache was
not significantly increased (Heesen, 2019). A study confirmed fewer top-ups
and a greater local anesthetic drug sparing effect evaluating the combined use
of this technique and the intermittent bolus drug delivery mode (Song, 2021).

■ Local Infiltration Analgesia
A local block is occasionally useful to augment an inadequate or “patchy”
regional block that was given emergently. Rarely, local infiltration may be
needed to perform an emergency cesarean delivery to save the life of a fetus
in the absence of anesthesia support. Two methods are described here.
In one technique, the skin is infiltrated along the proposed incision, and
the subcutaneous, muscle, and rectus sheath layers are injected as the
abdomen is opened. Injection of large volumes into the fatty layers, which
are relatively devoid of nerve supply, is avoided to limit the total dose of
local anesthetic needed.
Cooper and coworkers described using 52 mL of 0.5-percent lidocaine
with 1:200,000 epinephrine. This delivered 260 mg of lidocaine. Related to
lidocaine toxicity, higher lidocaine volumes can be used when paired with
epinephrine, because vasoconstriction lowers the intravascular transfer of
anesthetic. The maximum dose is 7 mg/kg. Others have used 1-percent
procaine with or without epinephrine (Larsen, 1971; Ranney, 1975).
A second technique involves a field block of the major branches
supplying the abdominal wall, to include the 10th, 11th, and 12th intercostal
nerves and the ilioinguinal and genitofemoral nerves (Nandagopal, 2001). As
shown in Figure 25-4, the former group of nerves is located at a point
midway between the costal margin and iliac crest in the midaxillary line. The
latter group is found at the level of the external inguinal ring. A total of four
skin punctures, two on each side, are made. First, at the intercostal block
site, the needle is directed medially, and injection is carried down to the
transversalis fascia, avoiding injection of the subcutaneous fat. Five mL of
0.5-percent lidocaine with epinephrine are injected. The needle is redirected
but not removed, and similar dosing is delivered to sites located at a 45degree angle cephalad and caudad. The other side is then injected. Second, at
the ilioinguinal and genitofemoral sites, the injection is started at a spot 2 to
3 cm lateral from the pubic tubercle at a 45-degree angle. Last, the skin
overlying the planned incision is injected.

FIGURE 25-4 Local anesthetic block for cesarean delivery. The first injection site is halfway between
the costal margin and iliac crest in the midaxillary line to block the 10th, 11th, and 12th intercostal
nerves. A second injection at the external inguinal ring blocks branches of the genitofemoral and
ilioinguinal nerves. Although not shown, both sites are infiltrated bilaterally. The final site is along the line
of proposed skin incision.

■ Transversus Abdominis Plane Block
This block may be used for those with suitable training (Young, 2012). It is
usually performed under ultrasound guidance and involves injection of a
local anesthetic into the transversus abdominis plane (TAP) between the

internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles (Fig. 2-2, p. 14). The
nerves lying in this plane supply the anterior abdominal wall at the T6 to L1
dermatomes. Ng and colleagues (2018) concluded that high- versus low-dose
local anesthetics performed comparably.
Local infiltration or TAP blocks can be used also for postoperative pain
control. The TAP block in one trial was not superior to local wound
infiltration (Tawfik, 2017). Gao and associates (2019) demonstrated that
pain relief with the TAP block was comparable with that from patientcontrolled IV analgesia. Another study found that the TAP block was
equivalent to intrathecal morphine for postoperative pain (Kwikiriza, 2019).
Last, Prabhu and coworkers (2018) reported that a liposomal bupivacaine
incisional block was not superior to placebo.

GENERAL ANESTHESIA
Trained personnel and specialized equipment—including fiberoptic
intubation—are mandatory for the safe use of general anesthesia. A common
cause of death cited is failed intubation. The latter occurs in approximately 1
of every 390 general anesthetics administered to pregnant women (Kinsella,
2015).
This relatively higher mortality rate suggests that neuraxial analgesia is
the preferred method of pain control and should be used unless
contraindicated (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019b; American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). In two reports from
the MFMU Network, 93 percent of more than 54,000 cesarean deliveries
were performed using neuraxial analgesia (Bloom, 2005; Brookfield, 2013).
Racial and ethnic disparities exist, and a higher incidence of general
anesthesia use is seen among non-white women (Butwick, 2014; Lange,
2017). It is often used for emergent cesarean delivery for acute fetal distress
(Metogo, 2021). In contrast, with obstetrical anesthesiologist subspecialists,
the overall likelihood that neuraxial analgesia will be used is higher (Cobb,
2019).

■ Patient Preparation

Before anesthesia induction, several steps should be taken to help minimize
complication risks. First, antacid administration shortly before anesthesia
induction has probably decreased mortality rates from general anesthesia
more than any other single practice. The American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia (2016) recommends
timely administration of a nonparticulate antacid, an H2-receptor antagonist,
or metoclopramide. For many years, we have recommended administration
of 30 mL of Bicitra—sodium citrate with citric acid—a few minutes before
anesthesia induction by either general or major neuraxial block. If more than
1 hour has passed after the first dose was given and anesthesia has not yet
been induced, a second dose is given.
Lateral uterine displacement also is provided as the uterus may compress
the inferior vena cava and aorta when the mother is supine. With uterine
displacement, the duration of general anesthesia has less effect on neonatal
condition than if the woman remains supine (Crawford, 1972).
Last, because functional reserve lung capacity is diminished, and oxygen
consumption is increased, the pregnant woman becomes hypoxemic more
rapidly during periods of apnea than do nonpregnant patients. Obesity
exacerbates this tendency. To minimize hypoxia between the time of muscle
relaxant injection and intubation, nitrogen is replaced by oxygen in the lungs.
This preoxygenation is accomplished by administering 100-percent oxygen
via face mask for 2 to 3 minutes before anesthesia induction. In an
emergency, four vital capacity breaths of 100-percent oxygen via a tight
breathing circuit will provide similar benefit (Norris, 1985). High-flow
nasal oxygen was found to be inferior to administration by face mask
(Shippam, 2019; Tan, 2019).

■ Induction of Anesthesia
Drugs used to induce general anesthesia include propofol, etomidate, and
ketamine. Propofol has the undesirable side effect of hypotension. Etomidate
is associated with fewer hemodynamic changes. Ketamine also may be used
for induction of general anesthesia in hemodynamically unstable women.

■ Intubation

Immediately after a patient is rendered unconscious, a muscle relaxant is
given to aid intubation. Succinylcholine, a rapid-onset and short-acting
agent, is used. Cricoid pressure—the Sellick maneuver—is applied by a
trained assistant to occlude the esophagus from the onset of induction until
intubation is completed. Before the operation begins, proper placement of the
endotracheal tube must be confirmed.
As discussed, and although uncommon, failed intubation is a major cause
of anesthesia-related maternal mortality. A history of prior difficult
intubation and a careful anatomical assessment of the neck and the
maxillofacial, pharyngeal, and laryngeal structures may help predict
intubation complications. Even in cases in which the initial airway
assessment was unremarkable, edema may develop intrapartum and present
considerable challenges. Morbid obesity is a major risk factor for failed or
difficult intubation.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetric
Anesthesia (2016) stresses the importance of appropriate preoperative
preparation. This includes the immediate availability of specialized
equipment such as different-shaped laryngoscopes, laryngeal mask airways,
and video laryngoscopes, as well as equipment for transtracheal ventilation
and awake oral intubation with a fiberoptic bronchoscope.
Following failed intubation, the woman is ventilated by mask and cricoid
pressure is applied to reduce the aspiration risk. Surgery may proceed with
mask ventilation, or the woman may be allowed to awaken. In those cases in
which the woman has been paralyzed and in which ventilation cannot be
reestablished by insertion of an oral airway, by laryngeal mask airway, or by
use of a fiberoptic laryngoscope, then a life-threatening emergency exists
(Eskander, 2019). To restore ventilation, percutaneous or even open
cricothyrotomy is performed, and jet ventilation begun. Failed intubation
drills have been recommended to optimize response to such an emergency.

■ Inhalational Anesthetics
Once the endotracheal tube is secured, a volatile halogenated agent is given
to provide amnesia and analgesia. The most commonly used volatile
anesthetics in the United States include desflurane and sevoflurane. These
gases can also produce uterine relaxation when given in high concentrations.
These are used when relaxation is a requisite, such as for internal podalic

version of the second twin, breech decomposition, ex utero intrapartum
treatment (EXIT) procedures, and replacement of the acutely inverted uterus.

■ Extubation
The endotracheal tube may be safely removed only if the woman is conscious
to a degree that enables her to follow commands and is capable of
maintaining oxygen saturation with spontaneous respiration. Consideration
should be given to emptying the stomach via a nasogastric tube before
extubation. As induction has now become safer, extubation may be relatively
more perilous. Of 15 anesthesia-related deaths of pregnant women from 1985
to 2003 in Michigan, none occurred during induction, whereas five resulted
from hypoventilation or airway obstruction during emergence, extubation, or
recovery (Mhyre, 2007).

■ Fasting
Data are insufficient regarding fasting times for clear liquids and the risk of
pulmonary aspiration during labor. The American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia (2016) and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend
that modest amounts of clear liquids such as water, clear tea, black coffee,
carbonated beverages, and pulp-free fruit juices be allowed in
uncomplicated laboring women. As discussed in Chapter 30 (p. 550),
enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols provide consumption of
these same liquids up to 2 hours before scheduled surgery (Wilson, 2018b).
Obvious solid foods should be avoided. A fasting period of 6 to 8 hours,
depending on the type of food ingested, is recommended for uncomplicated
parturients undergoing elective cesarean delivery or puerperal tubal ligation.
The amount of gastric fluid—2 mL/kg—in nonlaboring women is almost the
same as that in nonpregnant women (Van de Putte, 2019). However,
pregnancy is associated with horizontal shift of the stomach and a reduced
esophageal sphincter tone. Our policy at Parkland Hospital is to allow clear
liquids in low-risk uncomplicated laboring women in whom vaginal delivery
is anticipated.

■ Aspiration
Massive gastric acidic inhalation may cause pulmonary insufficiency from
aspiration pneumonitis (Mandell, 2019). Such pneumonitis has in the past
been the most common cause of anesthetic deaths in obstetrics and therefore
deserves special attention. To minimize this risk, antacids should be given
routinely, intubation should be accompanied by cricoid pressure, and
regional analgesia should be employed when possible.

Pathophysiology
In 1952, Teabeaut demonstrated experimentally that if the pH of aspirated
fluid was below 2.5, severe chemical pneumonitis developed. It was later
demonstrated that the gastric fluid pH of nearly half of women tested
intrapartum was <2.5 (Taylor, 1966). The right mainstem bronchus usually
offers the simplest pathway for aspirated material to reach the lung
parenchyma, and therefore, the right lower lobe is most often involved. In
severe cases, involvement is bilateral and widespread.
The woman who aspirates may develop evidence of respiratory distress
immediately or several hours after aspiration, depending in part on the
material aspirated and the severity of the response. Aspiration of a large
amount of solid material causes obvious signs of airway obstruction. Smaller
particles without acidic liquid may lead to patchy atelectasis and later to
bronchopneumonia.
When highly acidic liquid is inspired, decreased oxygen saturation along
with tachypnea, bronchospasm, rhonchi, rales, atelectasis, cyanosis,
tachycardia, and hypotension are likely to develop. At the injury sites, there
is pulmonary capillary leakage and exudation of protein-rich fluid containing
numerous erythrocytes into the lung interstitium and alveoli. This causes
decreased pulmonary compliance, shunting of blood, and severe hypoxemia.
Suspicion of aspiration demands close monitoring for evidence of
pulmonary damage. Respiratory rate and oxygen saturation as measured by
pulse oximetry are the most sensitive and earliest indicators of injury.
Radiographic changes may not appear immediately and may be variable.
Therefore, chest radiographs alone should not be used to exclude aspiration.

Treatment

Inhaled fluid should be immediately and thoroughly wiped from the mouth
and removed from the pharynx and trachea by suction. Saline lavage may
further disseminate the acid throughout the lung and is not recommended. If
large particulate matter is inspired, bronchoscopy may be indicated to
relieve airway obstruction. Use of corticosteroid therapy or prophylactic
antimicrobial administration are not supported by clinical or experimental
evidence (Mandell, 2019). If infection develops, however, vigorous
treatment is given. Etiological agents have shifted from anaerobic or mixed
infections to bacteria causing community- or hospital-acquired pneumonitis
(Metlay, 2019). These infections are discussed in Chapter 54 (p. 962). If
acute respiratory distress syndrome develops, mechanical ventilation with
positive end-expiratory pressure may prove lifesaving (Chap. 50, p. 885).

REFERENCES
Abrão KC, Francisco RP, Miyadahira S, et al: Elevation of uterine basal tone and fetal heart rate
abnormalities after labor analgesia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 113(10):41, 2009
Alexander JM, Sharma SK, McIntire DD, et al: Epidural analgesia lengthens the Friedman active phase
of labor. Obstet Gynecol 100:46, 2002
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin 209, March 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hyperten-sion and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, May 2020
American Society of Anesthesiologists: Practice guidelines for obstetric anesthesia. An updated report
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetric Anesthesia and the Society
for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology. Anesthesiology 124(2):270, 2016
Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RMD, Cyna AM, et al: Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain
management in labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD000331, 2018
Arevalo-Rodriguez I, Ciapponi A, Roqué i, Figuls M, et al: Posture and fluids for preventing post-dural
puncture headache. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD009199, 2016
Arkoosh V, Palmer C, Yun E, et al: A randomized, double-masked, multicenter comparison of the safety
of continuous intrathecal labor analgesia using a 28-gauge catheter versus continuous epidural labor
analgesia. Anesthesiology 108(2):286, 2008
Atkinson BD, Truitt LJ, Rayburn WF, et al: Double-blind comparison of intravenous butorphanol (Stadol)
and fentanyl (Sublimaze) for analgesia during labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:993, 1994
Bauchat JR, Weiniger CF, Sultan P, et al: Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology Consensus
Statement: Monitoring recommendations for prevention and detection of respiratory depression
associated with administration of neuraxial morphine for cesarean delivery analgesia. Anesth Analg
129(2):458, 2019

Bauer ME, Arendt K, Beilin Y, et al: The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
interdisciplinary consensus statement on neuraxial procedures in obstetrics patients with
thrombocytopenia. Anesth Analg 132:1531, 2021
Beamon C, Stuebe A, Edwards L, et al: Effect of mode of regional anesthesia on neonatal outcomes in
preeclamptic patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S173, 2014
Bell ED, Penning DH, Cousineau EF, et al: How much labor is in a labor epidural? Manpower cost and
reimbursement for an obstetric analgesia service in a teaching institution. Anesthesiology 92:851,
2000
Bi Y, Zhou J: Spinal subdural hematoma and subdural anesthesia following combined spinal-epidural
anesthesia: a case report. BMC Anesthesiol 21:130, 2021
Billingham A, Liang S, Edmonds E, et al: Continuous epidural infusion vs programmed intermittent
epidural bolus for labour analgesia: a prospective, controlled, before-and-after cohort study of labour
outcomes. Br J Anesth 121(2):432, 2018
Bloom SL, Spong CY, Weiner SJ, et al: Complications of anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 106:281, 2005
Bobb LE, Farber MK, McGovern C, et al: Does nitrous oxide labor analgesia influence the pattern of
neuraxial analgesia usage? An impact study at an academic medical center. J Clin Anesth 35:54,
2016
Booth JM, Pan JC, Ross VH, et al: Combined spinal epidural technique for labor analgesia does not
delay recognition of epidural catheter failures: a single-center retrospective cohort survival analysis.
Anesthesiology 125(3):516, 2016
Bricker L, Lavender T: Parenteral opioids for labor pain relief: a systematic review. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 186:S94, 2002
Brookfield K, Osmundson S, Jaqvi M, et al: General anesthesia at cesarean delivery portends worse
maternal and neonatal outcomes. Abstract No. 672. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1 Suppl):S28, 2013
Butler R, Fuller J: Back pain following epidural anaesthesia in labour. Can J Anaesth 45:724, 1998
Butwick AJ, Bentley J, Wong CJ, et al: United States state-level variation in the use of neuraxial
analgesia during labor for pregnant women. JAMA Network Open 1(8):e186567, 2018a
Butwick A, Blumenfeld Y, Brookfeld K, et al: Ethnic disparities among patients undergoing general
anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S259, 2014
Butwick AJ, Wong CA, Guo N: Maternal body mass index and use of labor neuraxial analgesia: a
population-based retrospective cohort study. Anesthesiology 129 (3):448, 2018b
Catterall WA, Mackie K: Local anesthetics. In Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knolmann BC (eds):
Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 13th ed. New York, McGraw
Hill Education, 2018, p 405
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Bacterial meningitis after intrapartum anesthesia—New
York and Ohio, 2008–2009. MMWR 59(3):65, 2010
Chan BO, Paech MJ: Persistent cerebrospinal fluid leak: a complication of the combined spinal-epidural
technique. Anesth Analg 98:828, 2004
Chau A, Bibbo C, Huang CC, et al: Dural puncture epidural technique improves labor analgesia quality
with fewer side effects compared with epidural and combined spinal epidural techniques: a
randomized clinical trial. Anesth Analg 124(2):560, 2017
Chen Y, Zou L, Guo L, et al: Prophylactic norepinephrine infusion for postspinal anesthesia hypotension
in patients undergoing cesarean section: a randomized, controlled, dose-finding trial.
Pharmocotherapy 41:370, 2021

Chestnut DH: Effect on the progress of labor and method of delivery. In Chestnut DH (ed): Obstetric
Anesthesia: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby-Year Book, 1999, p 408
Chestnut DH, McGrath JM, Vincent RD Jr, et al: Does early administration of epidural analgesia affect
obstetric outcome in nulliparous women who are in spontaneous labor? Anesthesiology 80:1201,
1994a
Chestnut DH, Vincent RD Jr, McGrather JM, et al: Does early administration of epidural analgesia
affect obstetric outcome in nulliparous women who are receiving intravenous oxytocin?
Anesthesiology 80:1193, 1994b
Chestnut DH, Wong CA, Tsen LC, et al (eds): Chestnut’s Obstetric Anesthesia: Principles and Practice,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020
Chestnut DH: Effect on the progress of labor and method of delivery. In Chestnut DH (ed): Obstetric
Anesthesia: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 1999, p 408
Chisholm ME, Campbell DC: Postpartum postural headache due to superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
mistaken for spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Can J Anaesth 48:302, 2001
Choi S, Brull R: Neuraxial techniques in obstetric and non-obstetric patients with common bleeding
diatheses. Anesth Analg 109(2):648, 2009
Cobb BT, Lane-Fall MB, Month RC, et al: Anesthesiologist specialization and use of general anesthesia
for cesarean delivery. Anesthesiology 130(2):237, 2019
Cooper MG, Feeney EM, Joseph M, et al: Local anaesthetic infiltration for caesarean section. Anaesth
Intensive Care 17(2):198, 1989
Craig MG, Grant EN, Tao W, et al: A randomized trial of bupivacaine plus fentanyl versus only fentanyl
for epidural analgesia during the second stage of labor. Anesthesiology 122(1):172, 2015
Crawford JS: Some maternal complications of epidural analgesia for labour. Anaesthesia 40:1219, 1985
Crawford JS, Burton M, Davies P: Time and lateral tilt at caesarean section. Br J Anaesth 44:477, 1972
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
D’Angelo R, Smiley RM, Riley ET, et al: Serious complications related to obstetric anesthesia: the
serious complication repository project of the Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology.
Anesthesiology 120(6):1505, 2014
Darouiche RO: Spinal epidural abscess. N Engl J Med 355:2012, 2006
Dashe JS, Rogers BB, McIntire DD, et al: Epidural analgesia and intrapartum fever: placental findings.
Obstet Gynecol 93:341, 1999
Davies JM, Stephens LS: Obstetric anesthesia liability concerns. Clin Obstet Gynecol 60:431, 2017
Del Arroyo AG, Sanchez J, Patel S, et al: Role of leucocyte caspase-1 activity in epidural-related
maternal fever: a single-centre, observational, mechanistic cohort study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):92,
2019
Dresner M, Brocklesby J, Bamber J: Audit of the influence of body mass index on the performance of
epidural analgesia in labour and the subsequent mode of delivery. BJOG 113:1178, 2006
Eskander A, de Almeida JR, Irish JC: Acute upper airway obstruction. N Engl J Med 381(20):1940,
2019
Fitzgerald JP, Fedoruk KA, Jadin SM, et al: Prevention of hypotension after spinal anaesthesia for
caesarean section: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
Anaesthesia 75(1):109, 2020
Friedman EA: Primigravid labor: a graphicostatistical analysis. Obstet Gynecol 6:567, 1955
Gao Y, Guo M, Du C, et al: Clinical study of ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block for
analgesia after cesarean section. Medicine (Baltimore) 98(41):e17542, 2019

Goodier CG, Lu JT, Hebber L, et al: Neuraxial anesthesia in parturients with thrombocytopenia: a
multisite retrospective cohort study. Anesth Analg 121(4):988, 2015
Grant GJ: Safely giving regional anesthesia to gravidas with clotting disorders. Contemp OB Gyn August
, 2007
Hatjis CG, Meis PJ: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern associated with butorphanol administration.
Obstet Gynecol 67:377, 1986
Hawkins JL: Epidural analgesia for labor and delivery. N Engl J Med 362:1503, 2010
Hawkins JL, Chang J, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related maternal mortality in the United States:
1979–2002. Obstet Gynecol 117:69, 2011
Hawkins JL, Koonin LM, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related deaths during obstetric delivery in the
United States, 1979–1990. Anesthesiology 86:277, 1997
Heesen M, Rijs K, Klimek M, et al: Dural puncture epidural versus conventional epidural block for labor
analgesia: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Int J Obstet Anesth 40:24, 2019
Heller PJ, Scheider EP, Marx GF: Pharyngolaryngeal edema as a presenting symptom in preeclampsia.
Obstet Gynecol 62:523, 1983
Hess PE, Pratt SD, Lucas TP, et al: Predictors of breakthrough pain during labor epidural analgesia.
Anesth Analg 93:414, 2001
Hill JB, Alexander JM, Sharma SK, et al: A comparison of the effects of epidural and meperidine
analgesia during labor on fetal heart rate. Obstet Gynecol 102:333, 2003
Hogg B, Hauth JC, Caritis SN, et al: Safety of labor epidural anesthesia for women with severe
hypertensive disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1096, 1999
Introna RPS, Blair JR, Neeld JB: What is the incidence of inadvertent dural puncture during epidural
anesthesia in obstetrics? Anesthesiology 117(3):686, 2012
Karahan MA, Incebiyik A, Buyukfirat E, et al: Effect of spinal anesthesia on the QT interval in term
and postterm pregnancies scheduled for elective cesarean section: a prospective study. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med January 33(18):3147, 2020
Katz D, Beilin Y: Disorders of coagulation in pregnancy. Br J Anaesth 115 Suppl 2:ii75, 2015
Katz D, Beilin Y: Review of the alternatives to epidural blood patch for treatment of postdural puncture
headache in the parturient. Anesth Analg 124(4):1219, 2017
Kennedy WF Jr, Bonica JJ, Akamatsu TJ, et al: Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of subarachnoid
block in the presence of acute blood loss. Anesthesiology 29:29, 1968
Kinsella SM, Winton AL, Mushambi MC, et al: Failed tracheal intubation during obstetric general
anaesthesia: a literature review. Int J Obstet Anesth 24(4):356, 2015
Kwikiriza A, Kiwanuka JK, Firth PG, et al: The analgesic effects of intrathecal morphine in comparison
with ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block after caesarean section: a randomised
controlled trial at a Ugandan regional referral hospital. Anaesthesia 74(2):167, 2019
Labat JJ, Riant T, Lassaux A, et al: Adding corticosteroids to the pudendal nerve block for pudendal
neuralgia: a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. BJOG 124(2):251, 2017
Lange EMS, Rao S, Toledo P: Racial and ethnic disparities in obstetric anesthesia. Semin Perinatol
41(5):293, 2017
Larsen JV, Barker A, Barker M, et al: A technique combining neurolept-analgesia with local analgesia
for caesarean section. S Afr Med J 45(27):750, 1971
Lee LA, Posner KL, Domino KB, et al: Injuries associated with regional anesthesia in the 1980s and
1990s: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 101:143, 2004
Lee LO, Bateman BT, Kheterpal S, et al: Risk of epidural hematoma after neuraxial techniques in
thrombocytopenic parturients: a report from the multicenter perioperative outcomes group.

Anesthesiology 126(6):1053, 2017
Leffert L, Butwick A, Carvalho B, et al: The Society of Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
consensus statement on the anesthetic management of pregnant and postpartum women receiving
thromboprophylaxis or higher dose anticoagulants. Anesth Analg 126(3):928, 2018
Lieberman E, Lang JM, Cohen A, et al: Association of epidural analgesia with cesarean delivery in
nulliparas. Obstet Gynecol 88:993, 1996
Lieberman E, O’Donoghue C: Unintended effects of epidural analgesia during labor: a systematic
review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:531, 2002
Likis FE, Andrews JC, Collins MR, et al: Nitrous oxide for the management of labor pain: a systematic
review. Anesth Analg 118(1):153, 2014
Lim G, Facco FL, Nathan N, et al: A review of the impact of obstetric anesthesia on maternal and
neonatal outcomes. Anesthesiology 129(1):192, 2018
Lim G, Zorn JM, Dong YJ, et al: Subdural hematoma associated with labor epidural analgesia: a case
series. Reg Anesth Pain Med 41(5):628, 2016
Lin Y, Liu SS: Local anesthetics. In Barash P, Cullen B, Stoeling R, et al (eds): Clinical Anesthesia, 8th
ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2017, p 1432
Lucas MJ, Sharma SK, McIntire DD, et al: A randomized trial of labor analgesia in women with
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:970, 2001
Luxman D, Wholman I, Groutz A, et al: The effect of early epidural block administration on the
progression and outcome of labor. Int J Obstet Anesth 7:161, 1998
Lyons G, Columb M, Hawthorne L, et al: Extradural pain relief in labour: bupivacaine sparing by
extradural fentanyl is dose dependent. Br J Anaesth 78:493, 1997
Mandell LA, Niederman MS: Aspiration pneumonia. N Engl J Med 380(7):651, 2019
Mankowitz SK, Gonzalez Fiol A, Smiley R: Failure to extend epidural labor analgesia for cesarean
delivery anesthesia: a focused review. Anesth Analg 123(5):1174, 2016
Manninen T, Aantaa R, Salonen M, et al: A comparison of the hemodynamic effects of paracervical
block and epidural anesthesia for labor analgesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 44:441, 2000
Maronge L, Bogod D: Complications in obstetric anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 73 (Suppl 1):61, 2018
McQuaid E, Leffert LR, Bateman BT: The role of the anesthesiologist in preventing severe maternal
morbidity and mortality. Clin Obstet Gynecol 61(2):372, 2018
Melber AA, Jelting Y, Huber M, et al: Remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia in labour: a six-year
audit of outcome data of the RemiPCA SAFE Network (2010-2015). Int J Obstet Anesth 39:12,
2019
Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, et al: Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired
Pneumonia. An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 200(7):e45, 2019
Metogo JAM, Nana TN, Ngongheh BA, et al: General versus regional anaesthesia for caesarean
section indicated for acute foetal distress: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Anesthesiol 21:68,
2021
Mhyre JM, Riesner MN, Polley LS, et al: A series of anesthesia-related maternal deaths in Michigan,
1985–2003. Anesthesiology 106:1096, 2007
Mikkelsen AP, Greiber IK, Scheller NM, et al: Association of labor epidural analgesia with autism
spectrum disorder in children. JAMA 3261170, 2021
Miller NR, Cypher RL, Nielsen PE, et al: Maternal pulse pressure at admission is a risk factor for fetal
heart rate changes after initial dosing of a labor epidural: a retrospective cohort study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 209(4):382.e1, 2013

Millet L, Shaha S, Bartholomew ML: Rates of bacteriuria in laboring with epidural analgesia: continuous
vs intermittent bladder catheterization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:316, 2012
Miro M, Guasch E, Gilsanz F: Comparison of epidural analgesia with combined spinal-epidural for labor:
a retrospective study of 6497 cases. Int J Obstet Anesth 17:15, 2008
Mitra R, Fleischmann K: Management of the sheared epidural catheter: is surgical extraction really
necessary? J Clin Anesth 19(4):310, 2007
Mohta M, Garg A, Chilkoti GT, et al: A randomised controlled trial of phenylephrine and noradrenaline
boluses for treatment of postspinal hypotension during elective caesarean section. Anaesthesia
74(7):850, 2019
Mokri B: The Munro-Kellie hypothesis: application in CSF volume depletion. Neurology 56:1746, 2001
Moore AR, Wieczorek PM, Carvalho JC: Association between post-dural puncture headache after
neuraxial anesthesia in childbirth and intracranial subdural hematoma. JAMA Neurol 77(1):65, 2020
Nandagopal M: Local anesthesia for cesarean section. Tech Reg Anesth Pain Manag 5(1):30, 2001
Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Fettiplace MR, et al: The Third American Society of Regional Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine Practice Advisory on Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity: Executive Summary 2017.
Reg Anesth Pain Med 43(2):113, 2018
Ng SC, Habib AS, Sodha S, et al: High-dose versus low-dose local anaesthetic for transversus
abdominis plane block post-cesarean delivery analgesia: a meta-analysis. Br J Anesth 120(2):252,
2018
Ngan Kee WD: The use of vasopressors during spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 30(3):319, 2017
Ngan Kee WD, Khaw KS, Ng FF, et al: Prophylactic phenylephrine infusion for preventing hypotension
during spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Anesth Analg 98:815, 2004
Noblett K, McKinney A, Kim R: Sheared epidural catheter during an elective procedure. Obstet
Gynecol 109:566, 2007
Norris MC, Dewan DM: Preoxygenation for cesarean section: a comparison of two techniques.
Anesthesiology 62:827, 1985
Ohel G, Gonen R, Vaida S, et al: Early versus late initiation of epidural analgesia in labor: does it
increase the risk of cesarean section? A randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:600, 2006
Osterman MJ, Martin JA: Epidural and spinal anesthesia use during labor, 2008. Natl Vital Stat Rep
59(5):1, 2011
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy-related deaths—
United States, 2007–2016. MMWR 68(35):762, 2019
Poma S, Scudeller L, Verga C, et al: Effects of combined spinal-epidural analgesia on first stage of
labor: a cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(21):3559, 2019
Prabhu M, Clapp MA, McQuaid-Hanson E, et al: Liposomal bupivacaine block at the time of cesarean
delivery to decrease postoperative pain: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 132(1):70,
2018
Ranney B, Stanage WF: Advantages of local anesthesia for cesarean section. Obstet Gynecol
45(2):163, 1975
Reynolds F, Sharma SK, Seed PT: Analgesia in labour and fetal acid-base balance: a meta-analysis
comparing epidural with systemic opioid analgesia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 109:1344, 2002
Rodriguez AN, Patel S, Macias DA, et al: Timing of emergency postpartum hospital visits in the fourth
trimester. Abstract No. 294, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:s198, 2020
Rogers R Jr: Basic pelvic neuroanatomy. In Steege J, Metzger D, Levy B (eds): Chronic Pelvic Pain: an
Integrated Approach. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1998, p 31

Rogers R, Gilson G, Kammerer-Doak D: Epidural analgesia and active management of labor: effects on
length of labor and mode of delivery. Obstet Gynecol 93:995, 1999
Rosen MA: Paracervical block for labor analgesia: a brief historic review. Am J Obstet Gynecol
186:S127, 2002
Ruppen W, Derry S, McQuay H, et al: Incidence of epidural hematoma, infection, and neurologic injury
in obstetric patients with epidural analgesia/anesthesia. Anesthesiology 105:394, 2006
Scavone BM, Wong CA, Sullivan JT, et al: Efficacy of a prophylactic epidural blood patch in preventing
post dural puncture headache in parturients after inadvertent dural puncture. Anesthesiology
101:1422, 2004
Seyb ST, Berka RJ, Socol ML, et al: Risk of cesarean delivery with elective induction of labor at term in
nulliparous women. Obstet Gynecol 94:600, 1999
Sharma SK, McIntire DD, Wiley J, et al: Labor analgesia and cesarean delivery. An individual patient
meta-analysis of nulliparous women. Anesthesiology 100:142, 2004
Sharma SK, Rogers BB, Alexander JM, et al: A randomized trial of the effects of antibiotic prophylaxis
on epidural-related fever in labor. Anesth Analg 118(3):604, 2014
Sharma SK, Sidawi JE, Ramin SM, et al: Cesarean delivery: a randomized trial of epidural versus
patient-controlled meperidine analgesia during labor. Anesthesiology 87:487, 1997
Shearer VE, Jhaveri HS, Cunningham FG: Puerperal seizures after post-dural puncture headache.
Obstet Gynecol 85:255, 1995
Shippam W, Preston R, Douglas J, et al: High-flow nasal oxygen vs. standard flow-rate facemask
preoxygenation in pregnant patients: a randomised physiological study. Anaesthesia 74(4):450, 2019
Sharkey AM, Siddiqui N, Downey K, et al: Comparison of intermittent intravenous boluses of
phenylephrine and norepinephrine to prevent and treat spinal-induced hypotension in cesarean
deliveries: randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg 129(5):1312, 2019
Shmueli A, Salman L, Orbach-Zinger S, et al: The impact of epidural analgesia on the duration of the
second stage of labor. Birth 45(4):377, 2018
Smarkusky L, DeCarvalho H, Bermudez A, et al: Acute onset headache complicating labor epidural
caused by intrapartum pneumocephalus. Obstet Gynecol 108:795, 2006
Song Y, Du W, Zhou S, et al: Effect of dural puncture epidural technique combined with programmed
intermittent epidural bolus on labor analgesia onset and maintenance: a randomized controlled trial.
Anesth Analg 32(4):971, 2021
Sprigge JS, Harper SJ: Accidental dural puncture and post dural puncture headache in obstetric
anaesthesia: presentation and management: a 23-year survey in a district general hospital.
Anaesthesia 63:36, 2008
Stocki D, Matot I, Einav S, et al: A randomized controlled trial of the efficacy and respiratory effects of
patient-controlled intravenous remifentanil analgesia and patient-controlled epidural analgesia in
laboring women. Anesth Analg 118(3):589, 2014
Sultan P, Sultan E, Carvalho B: Regional anaesthesia for labour, operative vaginal delivery and cesarean
delivery: a narrative review. Anaesthesia 76 Suppl 1:136, 2021
Svancarek W, Chirino O, Schaefer G Jr, et al: Retropsoas and subgluteal abscesses following
paracervical and pudendal anesthesia. JAMA 237:892, 1977
Tan PC, Millay OJ, Leeton L, et al: High-flow humidified nasal preoxygenation in pregnant women: a
prospective observational study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):86, 2019
Tawfik MM, Mohamed YM, Elbadrawi RE, et al: Transversus abdominis plane block versus wound
infiltration for analgesia after cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg
124(4):1291, 2017

Taylor G, Pryse-Davies J: The prophylactic use of antacids in the prevention of the acid pulmonary
aspiration syndrome (Mendelson’s syndrome). Lancet 1:288, 1966
Teabeaut JR II: Aspiration of gastric contents: an experimental study. Am J Pathol 28:51, 1952
Togioka BM, Seligman KM, Werntz MK, et al: Education program regarding labor epidurals increases
utilization by Hispanic Medicaid beneficiaries: a randomized controlled trial. Anesthesiology 131:840,
2019
Tsui MHY, Kee WDN, Ng FF, et al: A double blinded randomized placebo controlled study of
intramuscular pethidine for pain relief in the first stage of labour. BJOG 111:648, 2004
Ulubaşoğlu H, Bakay K, Guven D: Relation with postpartum maternal morbidity of different types of
anesthesia in preeclamptic patients. Hypertens Pregnancy 37(1):25, 2018
Vallejo MC, Mandell GL, Sabo DP, et al: Postdural puncture headache: a randomized comparison of five
spinal needles in obstetric patients. Anesth Analg 91:916, 2000
Van de Putte P, Vernieuwe L, Perias A: Term pregnant patients have similar gastric volume to
nonpregnant females: a single-centre cohort study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):79, 2019
Veeser M, Hofmann T, Roth R, et al: Vasopressors for the management of hypotension after spinal
anesthesia for elective caesarean section. Systematic review and cumulative meta-analysis. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 56(7):810, 2012
Vricella LK, Louis JM, Mercer BM, et al: Impact of morbid obesity on epidural anesthesia complications
in labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:307, 2011
Wallace DH, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG, et al: Randomized comparison of general and regional
anesthesia for cesarean delivery in pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 86:193, 1995
Wang Y, Xu M: Comparison of ropivacaine combined with sufentanil for epidural anesthesia and spinalepidural anesthesia in labor analgesia. BMC Anesthesiol 20(1):1, 2020
Wilson MJ, MacArthur C, Hewitt CA, et al: Intravenous remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia versus
intramuscular pethidine for pain relief in labour (RESPITE): an open-label, multicentre, randomized
controlled trial. Lancet 392(10148):662, 2018a
Wilson RD, Caughey AB, Wood SL, et al: Guidelines for Antenatal and Preoperative care in Cesarean
Delivery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society Recommendations (Part 1). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 219(6):523.e1, 2018b
Wong CA, McCarthy RJ, Sullivan JT, et al: Early compared with late neuraxial analgesia in nulliparous
labor induction. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1066, 2009
Wong CA, Scavone BM, Peaceman AM, et al: The risk of cesarean delivery with neuraxial analgesia
given early versus late in labor. N Engl J Med 352:655, 2005
Xu C, Liu S, Huang Y, et al: Phenylephrine vs ephedrine in cesarean delivery under spinal anesthesia: A
systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Int J Surg 60:48, 2018
Young MJ, Gorlin AW, Modes VE, et al: Clinical implications of the transversus abdominis plane block in
adults. Anesthesiol Res Pract 2012:731645, 2012
Yurashevich M, Carvalho B, Butwick AJ, et al: Determinants of women’s dissatisfaction with
anaesthesia care in labour and delivery. Anaesthesia 74(9):1112, 2019
Zafirova Z, Sheehan C, Hosseinian L: Update on nitrous oxide and its use in anesthesia practice. Best
Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 32(2):113, 2018
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Preg 28(2):127, 2009

