CHAPTER 10

Prenatal Care

PRENATAL CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY
INITIAL PRENATAL EVALUATION
SUBSEQUENT PRENATAL VISITS
NUTRITIONAL COUNSELING
COMMON CONCERNS
REFERENCES
The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) define prenatal care as “A
comprehensive antepartum program involves a coordinated approach to
medical care, continuous risk assessment, and psychosocial support that
optimally begins before pregnancy and extends throughout the postpartum and
interpregnancy period.” As promulgated by John Ballantyne, such care has
been a bedrock to improve pregnancy outcomes for more than 100 years
(Reiss, 2000).

PRENATAL CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Almost a century after its introduction, prenatal care has become one of the
most frequently used health services in the United States. According to the

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), only 1.6 percent of
women who gave birth in 2016 received no prenatal care (Osterman, 2018).
African-American and Hispanic women have high rates of inadequate or no
prenatal care that reach 10 and 7.7 percent, respectively. This figure is
greater for adolescents, particularly those younger than 15 years, compared
with older age groups. These data highlight areas of potential improvement
by the health-care system.

■ Prenatal Care Effectiveness
Care designed during the early 1900s focused on lowering the extremely high
maternal mortality rate. Prenatal care undoubtedly contributed to the dramatic
decline in maternal deaths from 690 per 100,000 births in 1920 to 50 per
100,000 by 1955 (Loudon, 1992). Data from 1998 to 2005 from the
Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System identified a fivefold increased risk
for maternal death in women who received no prenatal care (Berg, 2010).
Goldenberg and McClure (2018) have emphasized the importance of
prenatal care to reduce stillbirth rates as well. In a study of almost 29 million
births, the risk for preterm birth, stillbirth, early and late neonatal death, and
infant death rose linearly with decreasing prenatal care utilization (Partridge,
2012). Similarly, from Parkland Hospital, Leveno and associates (2009)
found that a significant decline in preterm births correlated closely with any
use of prenatal care by medically indigent women. And in women with
diabetes, adherence to prenatal care resulted in lower rates of neonatal
admissions to the intensive care unit (Sperling, 2018a).
Group prenatal care is acceptable and effective (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018g). Ickovics and coworkers (2016)
compared this with individual prenatal care. Group care provided traditional
pregnancy surveillance in a group setting with special focus on support,
education, and active health-care participation. Women enrolled in group
care had significantly better pregnancy outcomes. Carter and colleagues
(2017) cited similar results. Childbirth education classes are also reported to
result in better pregnancy outcomes (Afshar, 2017). Pregnancy in adolescents
carries special risk, and guidelines have been developed that focus on this
age group (Fleming, 2015).

DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY
Pregnancy is usually identified when a woman presents with symptoms and
possibly a positive home urine pregnancy test result. Typically, these women
receive confirmatory testing of urine or blood for human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG). Further, presumptive signs or diagnostic findings of
pregnancy may be found during the clinical examination. Sonography is often
used, especially if miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy is a concern.

■ Symptoms and Signs
Amenorrhea in a healthy reproductive-aged woman who previously has
experienced spontaneous, cyclical, predictable menses is highly suggestive
of pregnancy. Menstrual cycles vary appreciably in length among women and
even in the same woman (Chap. 5, p. 83). Thus, amenorrhea is not a reliable
pregnancy indicator until 10 or more days have passed after expected
menses. Occasionally, uterine bleeding that mimics menstruation is noted
after conception. During the first month of pregnancy, these episodes are
likely the consequence of blastocyst implantation. Still, first-trimester
bleeding should prompt evaluation for an abnormal pregnancy.
Of other symptoms, maternal perception of fetal movement depends on
factors such as parity and habitus. In general, after a first successful
pregnancy, a woman may first perceive fetal movements between 16 and 18
weeks’ gestation. A primigravida may not appreciate fetal movements until
approximately 2 weeks later. At about 20 weeks, depending on maternal
habitus, an examiner can begin to detect fetal movements. Of pregnancy
signs, changes in the lower reproductive tract, uterus, and breasts develop
early.

■ Pregnancy Tests
Detection of hCG in maternal blood and urine is the basis for endocrine
assays of pregnancy. Syncytiotrophoblast produces hCG in amounts that
increase exponentially during the first trimester. hCG and luteinizing hormone
(LH) share the same receptor in tissues. Thus, a main function of hCG is to
prevent involution of the corpus luteum, which is the principal site of
progesterone formation during the first 6 weeks of pregnancy.

With a sensitive test, the hormone can be detected in maternal serum or
urine by 8 to 9 days after ovulation. The doubling time of serum hCG
concentration is 1.4 to 2.0 days. As shown in Figure 10-1, serum levels range
widely and increase from the day of implantation. Lower levels of hCG rise
more rapidly than higher levels (Barnhart, 2016). Peak hCG levels are
reached at 60 to 70 days. Thereafter, the concentration declines slowly to a
plateau at approximately 16 weeks’ gestation.

FIGURE 10-1 Mean concentration (95% CI) of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in serum of
women throughout normal pregnancy.

Measurement of hCG
This hormone is a glycoprotein with high carbohydrate content. The general
structure of hCG is a heterodimer composed of two dissimilar subunits,
designated α and β, which are noncovalently linked. The α-subunit is
identical to those of LH, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and thyroidstimulating hormone (TSH), but the β-subunit is structurally distinct. Thus,
antibodies were developed with high specificity for the hCG β-subunit. This
specificity allows its detection, and numerous commercial immunoassays are
available for measuring serum and urine hCG levels. Each immunoassay
detects a slightly different mixture of hCG variants, its free subunits, or its
metabolites—however, all are appropriate for pregnancy testing (Braunstein,
2014). Depending on the assay used, the sensitivity for the laboratory
detection limit of hCG in serum is 1.0 mIU/mL or even lower.

False-positive hCG test results are rare. A few women have circulating
serum factors that may bind erroneously with the test antibody directed to
hCG in a given assay. The most common factors are heterophilic antibodies.
These are produced by an individual and bind to the animal-derived test
antibodies used in a given immunoassay. Thus, women who have worked
closely with animals are more likely to develop these antibodies, and
alternative laboratory techniques are available (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a). Elevated hCG levels may also
reflect molar pregnancy and its associated neoplasms (Chap. 13, p. 238).
Other rare causes of positive assays without pregnancy are (1) exogenous
hCG injection used for weight loss, (2) renal failure with impaired hCG
clearance, (3) physiological pituitary hCG, and (4) hCG-producing tumors
that most commonly originate from gastrointestinal sites, ovary, bladder, or
lung (McCash, 2017).

Home Pregnancy Tests
More than 60 different types of over-the-counter pregnancy test kits are
available in the United States (Grenache, 2015). Unfortunately, many of these
are not as accurate as advertised (Johnson, 2015). For example, Cole and
associates (2011) found that a detection limit of 12.5 mIU/mL would be
required to diagnose 95 percent of pregnancies at the time of missed menses.
However, they reported that only one brand had this degree of sensitivity.
Two other brands gave false-positive or invalid results. In fact, with an hCG
concentration of 100 mIU/mL, clearly positive results were displayed by
only 44 percent of brands. Accordingly, only approximately 15 percent of
pregnancies could be diagnosed at the time of the missed menses. Some
manufacturers of even newer home urine assays claim >99-percent accuracy
for tests done on the day of—and some up to 4 days before—the expected
day of menses. Again, careful analysis suggests that these assays are often not
as sensitive as advertised.

■ Sonographic Recognition of Pregnancy
Transvaginal sonography is commonly used to accurately establish
gestational age and confirm pregnancy location. A gestational sac is the first
sonographic evidence of pregnancy, and it may be seen with transvaginal
sonography by 4 to 5 weeks’ gestation. It should not be confused with a

pseudogestational sac. The latter, or pseudosac, is a fluid collection within
the endometrial cavity, which can occur in the setting of ectopic pregnancy
(Fig. 12-3, p. 223). Further evaluation may be warranted if this is the only
sonographic finding, particularly in a woman with pain or bleeding. A
normal gestational sac implants eccentrically in the endometrium, whereas a
pseudosac is seen in the midline of the endometrial cavity. Other potential
indicators of early intrauterine pregnancy are an anechoic center surrounded
by a single echogenic rim—the intradecidual sign—or two concentric
echogenic rings surrounding the gestational sac—the double decidual sign
(Fig. 10-2). If sonography yields equivocal findings, the term pregnancy of
unknown location (PUL) is applied (Bobdiwala, 2019). In these cases,
serial serum hCG levels and transvaginal sonography can help differentiate a
normal intrauterine pregnancy from an extrauterine pregnancy or an early
miscarriage (Chap. 12, p. 222).

FIGURE 10-2 Transvaginal sonogram of a first-trimester intrauterine pregnancy. The double decidual
sign is noted surrounding the gestational sac and is defined by the decidua parietalis (white asterisk)
and the decidua capsularis (yellow asterisk). The arrow notes the yolk sac, and the crown-rump length
of the embryo is marked with measuring calipers. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Elysia
Moschos.)

If the yolk sac—a brightly echogenic ring with an anechoic center—is
seen within the gestational sac, an intrauterine location for the pregnancy is
confirmed. The yolk sac can normally be seen by the middle of the fifth
week. As shown in Figure 10-2, after 6 weeks, an embryo is seen as a linear
structure immediately adjacent to the yolk sac. Cardiac motion is typically
noted at this point.

INITIAL PRENATAL EVALUATION
Prenatal care is ideally initiated early. Major goals are to (1) define the
health status of the mother and fetus, (2) estimate the gestational age, and (3)
initiate a plan for continued obstetrical care. Typical components of the
initial visit are summarized in Table 10-1. Subsequent care may range from
relatively infrequent routine visits to prompt hospitalization because of
serious maternal or fetal disease.
TABLE 10-1. Typical Components of Routine Prenatal Care

■ Prenatal Record
Use of a standardized record within a perinatal health-care system greatly
aids antepartum and intrapartum management. Standardizing documentation
allows communication and care continuity between providers and enables
objective measures of care quality to be evaluated over time and across
different clinical settings (Gregory, 2006). A prototype is provided by the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017) in their Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th
edition.

Definitions
Several definitions are pertinent to establishment of an accurate prenatal
record.
1. Nulligravida—a woman who currently is not pregnant and has never been
pregnant.
2. Gravida—a woman who currently is pregnant or has been in the past,
irrespective of the pregnancy outcome. With the establishment of the first
pregnancy, she becomes a primigravida, and with successive pregnancies,
a multigravida.
3. Nullipara—a woman who has never completed a pregnancy beyond 20
weeks’ gestation. She may not have been pregnant or may have had a
spontaneous or elective abortion(s) or an ectopic pregnancy.
4. Primipara—a woman who has been delivered only once of a fetus or
fetuses born alive or dead with an estimated gestation duration of 20 or
more weeks. In the past, a 500-g birthweight threshold was used to define
parity. This threshold is now controversial. Namely, many states still use
this weight to differentiate a stillborn fetus from an abortus, but the
survival of neonates with birthweights <500 g is no longer uncommon
(Chap. 1, p. 2).
5. Multipara—a woman who has completed two or more pregnancies with
gestational ages at least 20 weeks. Parity is determined by the number of
pregnancies reaching 20 weeks. It is not increased to a higher number if
multiples are delivered in a given pregnancy. Moreover, stillbirth does not
lower this number.

In some locales, the obstetrical history is summarized by a series of
digits connected by dashes. These refer to the number of term newborns,
preterm neonates, abortuses younger than 20 weeks, and children currently
alive. For example, a woman who is para 2–1–0–3 has had two term
deliveries, one preterm delivery, no abortuses, and has three living
children. Because these are nonconventional, it is helpful to specify the
outcome of any pregnancy that did not end normally.

Normal Pregnancy Duration
The normal duration of pregnancy calculated from the first day of the last
normal menstrual period is very close to 280 days or 40 weeks. A quick
estimate of a pregnancy due date based on menstrual data can be made as
follows: add 7 days to the first day of the last period and subtract 3 months.
For example, if the first day of the last menses was October 5, the due date is
10-05 minus 3 (months) plus 7 (days) = 7–12 or July 12 of the following
year. This calculation is the Naegele rule. However, menstrual cycle length
varies among women and renders many of these calculations inaccurate.
This, combined with the frequent use of first-trimester sonography, has
changed the method of determining an accurate gestational age.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017e), the
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, and the Society for MaternalFetal Medicine have emphasized that first-trimester ultrasound is the most
accurate method to establish or reaffirm gestational age. For pregnancies
conceived by assisted reproductive technologies, embryo age or transfer date
is used to assign gestational age. If available, the gestational ages calculated
from the last menstrual period and from first-trimester ultrasound are
compared, and this estimated date of delivery is recorded. Reconciling any
discordance between these two values is discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 248).

Trimesters
It has become customary to divide pregnancy into three equal epochs or
trimesters of approximately 3 calendar months. More recently a “fourth
trimester” has been recognized to emphasize the need for comprehensive
postpartum care (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2018i). This is discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 634). Historically, the first
trimester extends through completion of 14 weeks, the second through 28

weeks, and the third through 42 weeks. The fourth is the 12 weeks after
delivery. Thus, prenatally, there are three periods of 14 weeks each. Certain
major obstetrical problems tend to cluster in each of these three time periods.
For example, most spontaneous abortions take place during the first trimester,
whereas most women with hypertensive disorders due to pregnancy are
diagnosed during the third trimester.
In modern obstetrics, the clinical use of trimesters to describe a specific
pregnancy is imprecise. For example, it is inappropriate in cases of uterine
hemorrhage to categorize the problem temporally as “third-trimester
bleeding.” Appropriate management for the mother and her fetus will vary
remarkably depending on whether bleeding begins early or late in the third
trimester (Chap. 42, p. 733). Because precise knowledge of fetal age is
imperative for obstetrical management, the clinically appropriate unit is
weeks of gestation completed. Clinicians designate gestational age using
completed weeks and days. For example, 334/7 weeks or 33 + 4 describes
pregnancy duration of 33 completed weeks and 4 days.

Previous and Current Health Status
As elsewhere in medicine, history-taking begins with queries concerning
medical or surgical disorders. Detailed information regarding previous
pregnancies is essential, as many obstetrical complications tend to recur in
subsequent pregnancies. The menstrual and contraceptive histories also are
important. As noted earlier, gestational age may be less accurate for those
with irregular menses. Moreover, some methods of birth control favor
ectopic implantation following method failure (Chap. 38, p. 665).
Psychosocial Screening. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) define
psychosocial issues as nonbiomedical factors that affect mental and physical
well-being. Women should be screened regardless of social status, education
level, race, or ethnicity. Such screening should seek barriers to care,
communication obstacles, nutritional status, unstable housing, desire for
pregnancy, safety concerns that include intimate-partner violence,
depression, stress, and use of substances such as tobacco, alcohol, and illicit
drugs. This screening is performed on a regular basis, at least once per
trimester, to identify important issues and reduce adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Coker and colleagues (2012) compared pregnancy outcomes in

women before and after implementation of a universal psychosocial
screening program and found that screened women were less likely to have
preterm or low-birthweight newborns, as well as other adverse outcomes.
Specific screens for depression are presented in Chapter 64 (p. 1143).
Cigarette Smoking. These data are included on the birth certificate, and the
number of pregnant women who smoke continues to decline. From 2000 to
2010, the prevalences were 12 to 13 percent (Tong, 2013). By 2016, the
incidence was 7.2 percent according to the National Center for Health
Statistics (Drake, 2018). Concurrent with the decline in cigarette use, there
has been an increase in electronic cigarettes/vaping with a reported
prevalence of 0.6 to 15 percent (Whittington, 2018). In a survey of more than
3000 mothers in Oklahoma and Texas, 7 percent reported using electronic
vapor products prior to conception and in the postpartum period. Of these
women, according to the CDC, 1.4 percent used them during the last 3 months
of pregnancy (Kapaya, 2019).
According to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (2018),
smoking is associated with subfertility. Higher rates of miscarriage,
stillbirth, low birthweight, and preterm delivery also are linked to smoking
during pregnancy (Dahlin, 2016; Luke, 2018; Tong, 2013). Compared with
nonsmokers, risks of placenta previa, placental abruption, and premature
membrane rupture are increased twofold. Potential teratogenic effects are
reviewed in Chapter 8 (p. 156). Thus, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommends that clinicians offer counseling and effective intervention
options to pregnant smokers at the first and subsequent prenatal visits (Siu,
2015). Although benefits are greatest if smoking ceases early in pregnancy or
preferably preconceptionally, quitting at any stage of pregnancy can improve
perinatal outcomes (Soneji, 2019).
Compared with simple counseling to quit, person-to-person psychosocial
interventions are significantly more successful in achieving smoking
abstinence in pregnancy (Fiore, 2008). One example is a brief counseling
session covering the “5As” of smoking cessation (Table 10-2). This
approach can be accomplished in 15 minutes or less and is effective when
initiated by health-care providers (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b).
TABLE 10-2. Five A’s of Smoking Cessation

Behavioral interventions and nicotine replacement products are
successful in reducing smoking rates (Patnode, 2015). However, nicotine
replacement has not been sufficiently evaluated to determine its effectiveness
and safety in pregnancy. Trials evaluating such therapy have yielded
conflicting evidence (Coleman, 2015; Spindel, 2016). Two randomized trials
also produced inconclusive results. In the Smoking and Nicotine in
Pregnancy (SNAP) trial, Cooper and associates (2014) reported that a
temporary cessation of smoking may have been associated with improved
infant development. In the Study of Nicotine Patch in Pregnancy (SNIPP)
trial, no differences in smoking cessation rates or birthweights were found
(Berlin, 2014). Similar preliminary results were reported for sustainedrelease bupropion (Nanovskaya, 2017). Olson and colleagues (2019)
reported that financial incentives were helpful to encourage smoking
cessation.
Because of limited available evidence to support pharmacotherapy for
smoking cessation in pregnancy, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends that if nicotine replacement therapy is
used, it should be done with close supervision and after careful
consideration of the risks of smoking versus nicotine replacement.
Alcohol. Ethyl alcohol or ethanol is a potent teratogen that causes the fetal
alcohol spectrum disorders. Fetal alcohol syndrome, the most severe form
of these disorders, is characterized by growth restriction, facial
abnormalities, and central nervous system dysfunction. The estimated
prevalence of these disorders is 11 to 50 per 1000 (May, 2018).
As discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 150), women who are pregnant or
considering pregnancy should abstain from drinking any alcoholic beverages
(Sarman, 2018). The CDC analyzed data from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System from 2015 to 2017 and estimated that 12 percent of
pregnant women used alcohol (Denny, 2019). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a) in collaboration with the CDC has

developed the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD) Prevention
Program, which provides resources for providers and is available at
www.acog.org/alcohol.
Illicit Drugs. An estimated 10 percent of fetuses are exposed to one or more
illicit drugs. Agents may include heroin and other opiates, cocaine,
amphetamines, barbiturates, and marijuana (American Academy of
Pediatrics, 2017). As discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 157), chronic use of large
quantities is harmful to the fetus (Metz, 2015). Well-documented sequelae
include fetal-growth restriction, low birthweight, and drug withdrawal soon
after birth. Adverse effects of marijuana are less convincing. Women who
use such drugs frequently do not seek prenatal care, which in itself is
associated with risks for preterm and low-birthweight neonates (Eriksen,
2016).
For women who abuse heroin, methadone maintenance can be initiated
within a registered methadone treatment program to reduce complications of
illicit opioid use and narcotic withdrawal, to encourage prenatal care, and to
avoid drug culture risks (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017g). Available programs can be found through the
treatment locator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration at www.samhsa.gov. Methadone dosages usually are initiated
at 10 to 30 mg orally daily and titrated as needed. In some women, careful
methadone taper may be an appropriate option (Stewart, 2013).
Buprenorphine alone or in combination with naloxone also may be offered
and managed by physicians with specific credentialing. These therapeutic
options are considered in greater detail in Chapter 64 (p. 1150).
Intimate-Partner Violence. This term refers to a pattern of assault and
coercive behavior that may include physical injury, psychological abuse,
sexual assault, progressive isolation, stalking, deprivation, intimidation, and
reproductive coercion (Miller, 2019). Such violence is recognized as a
major public health problem. Unfortunately, most abused women continue to
be victimized during pregnancy. With the possible exception of
preeclampsia, intimate-partner violence (IPV) is more prevalent than any
major medical condition detectable through routine prenatal screening
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). The estimated prevalence during
pregnancy lies between 4 and 8 percent. IPV is associated with an increased

risk of several adverse perinatal outcomes that include preterm delivery,
fetal-growth restriction, and perinatal death (Chap. 50, p. 891).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) has
provided methods for IPV screening and recommends their use at the first
prenatal visit, again at least once per trimester, and again at the postpartum
visit. Such screening should be done privately and away from family
members and friends. Patient self-administered or computerized screenings
appear to be as effective for disclosure as clinician-directed interviews
(Ahmad, 2009; Chen, 2007). Physicians should be familiar with state laws
that may require reporting of IPV. Coordination with social services can be
invaluable in these cases. The National Domestic Violence Hotline (1–800–
799-SAFE [7233]) is a nonprofit telephone referral service that provides
individualized information regarding city-specific shelter locations,
counseling resources, and legal advocacy.

■ Clinical Evaluation
Thorough, general physical and pelvic examinations should be completed at
the initial prenatal encounter. The cervix is visualized using a speculum
lubricated with warm water or water-based lubricant gel. Bluish-red passive
hyperemia of the cervix is characteristic, but not diagnostic, of pregnancy.
Dilated, occluded cervical glands bulging beneath the ectocervical mucosa—
nabothian cysts—may be prominent. The cervix is not normally dilated
except at the external os. To identify cytological abnormalities, a Pap test is
performed according to current guidelines noted in Chapter 66 (p. 1164).
Specimens for identification of Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria
gonorrhoeae are obtained when indicated (p. 181).
Bimanual examination is completed by palpation. Special attention is
given to the consistency, length, and dilation of the cervix; to uterine and
adnexal size; to the bony pelvic architecture; and to any vaginal or perineal
anomalies. Often, later in pregnancy, fetal presentation also can be
determined. Lesions of the cervix, vagina, or vulva are further evaluated as
needed by colposcopy, biopsy, or culture. The perianal region is inspected,
and digital rectal examination is performed as required for complaints of
rectal pain, bleeding, or mass.

Gestational Age Assessment

Precise knowledge of gestational age is essential for prenatal care, because
several pregnancy complications may develop and optimal treatment will
depend on fetal age. Menstrual history is best confirmed by first-trimester
sonography (Chap. 14, p. 248). That said, gestational age can also be
estimated with considerable precision by a carefully performed clinical
uterine size examination that is coupled with last menstrual period dating.
Uterine size similar to a small orange roughly correlates with a 6-week
gestation; a large orange, with an 8-week pregnancy; and a grapefruit, with
one at 12 weeks (Margulies, 2001).

■ Laboratory Tests
Recommended routine tests at the first prenatal encounter are listed in Table
10-1. Initial blood tests include a complete blood count, a determination of
blood type and Rh status, and an antibody screen. The Institute of Medicine
recommends universal human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing as a
routine part of prenatal care. This testing is explained to the patient, who may
decline. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018j)
continues to support this practice. If a woman declines, this is recorded in the
prenatal record. All pregnant women are screened also for hepatitis B virus
infection, syphilis, and immunity to rubella at the initial visit.
Based on their prospective investigation of 1000 women, Murray and
coworkers (2002) concluded that in the absence of hypertension, routine
urinalysis beyond the first prenatal visit was unnecessary. A urine culture is
recommended by most, because treating bacteriuria significantly reduces the
likelihood of developing symptomatic urinary tract infections in pregnancy
(Chap. 56, p. 996).

Cervical Infections
C trachomatis is isolated from the cervix in 2 to 13 percent of pregnant
women. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend that all women be
screened for chlamydia during the first prenatal visit, with additional thirdtrimester testing for those at increased risk. Risk factors include unmarried
status, recent change in sexual partner or multiple concurrent partners, age
younger than 25 years, inner-city residence, history or presence of other
sexually transmitted diseases, and little or no prenatal care. For those testing

positive, treatment described in Chapter 68 (p. 1212) is followed by a
second testing—a test of cure—3 to 4 weeks after treatment completion.
N gonorrhoeae typically causes cervicitis or urethritis in pregnancy.
Infrequently, it may also cause septic arthritis (Bleich, 2012). Risk factors
for gonorrhea are similar to those for chlamydial infection. The American
Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) recommend that pregnant women with risk factors or
those living in an area of high N gonorrhoeae prevalence be screened at the
initial prenatal visit and again in the third trimester. Treatment is given for
gonorrhea and simultaneously for possible coexisting chlamydial infection
(Chap. 68, p. 1211). Test of cure is recommended following treatment.

■ Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Many factors can adversely affect maternal and fetal well-being. Some are
evident at conception, but many become apparent during the course of
pregnancy. The designation of “high-risk pregnancy” is overly vague for an
individual woman and is best avoided if a more specific diagnosis can be
assigned. Some common risk factors for which consultation is recommended
by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) are shown in Table 10-3. Some
conditions may require the involvement of a maternal-fetal medicine
specialist, geneticist, neonatologist, anesthesiologist, cardiologist, or other
specialist.
TABLE 10-3. Conditions for Which Maternal-Fetal Medicine Consultation
May Be Beneficial

SUBSEQUENT PRENATAL VISITS
These are traditionally scheduled at 4-week intervals until 28 weeks, then
every 2 weeks until 36 weeks, and weekly thereafter. Women with
complicated pregnancies—for example, with twins or diabetes—often
require return visits at 1- to 2-week intervals (Power, 2013). In 1986, the
Department of Health and Human Services convened an expert panel to
review the content of prenatal care. This report was subsequently
reevaluated and revised in 2005 (Gregory, 2006). The panel recommended,
among other things, early and continuing risk assessment that is patient
specific. It also endorsed flexibility in clinical visit spacing; health
promotion and education, including preconceptional care; medical and
psychosocial interventions; standardized documentation; and expanded
prenatal care objectives that include family health up to 1 year after birth.
The World Health Organization conducted a multicenter randomized trial
with almost 25,000 women that compared routine prenatal care with an

experimental model designed to minimize visits (Villar, 2001). In the new
model, women were seen once in the first trimester and screened for certain
risks. Those without anticipated complications—80 percent of those
screened—were seen again at 26, 32, and 38 weeks. Compared with routine
prenatal care, which required a median of eight visits, the new model
required a median of only five. No disadvantages were attributed to the
regimen with fewer visits, and these findings are consistent with other
randomized trials.

■ Prenatal Surveillance
At each return visit, the well-being of mother and fetus are assessed (see
Table 10-1). Fetal heart rate, growth, and activity are evaluated. Maternal
blood pressure and weight and their extent of change are assessed. Symptoms
such as abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, bleeding, vaginal fluid
leakage, headache, altered vision, and dysuria are sought. After 20 weeks’
gestation, uterine examination measures size from the symphysis to the fundus
with a traditional tape measure. In late pregnancy, vaginal examination often
provides valuable information. This may include confirmation of the
presenting part and its station, clinical estimation of pelvic capacity and
configuration, fetal ballottement as a reflection of sufficient amnionic fluid
volume, and cervical consistency, effacement, and dilation (Chap. 22, p.
426).

Fundal Height
Between 20 and 34 weeks’ gestation, the height of the uterine fundus
measured in centimeters correlates closely with gestational age in weeks.
This measurement is used to monitor fetal growth and amnionic fluid volume.
It is measured along the abdominal wall from the top of the symphysis pubis
to the top of the fundus. Importantly, the bladder must be emptied before
fundal measurement. Obesity or the presence of uterine masses such as
leiomyomas also may limit fundal height measurement accuracy. Moreover,
using fundal height alone, fetal-growth restriction may be undiagnosed in up
to a third of cases (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021b; Haragan, 2015).

Fetal Heart Sounds
Instruments incorporating Doppler ultrasound are usually used to easily
detect fetal heart action, and in the absence of maternal obesity, heart sounds
are almost always detectable by 10 weeks with such instruments (Chap. 24,
p. 447). The fetal heart rate ranges from 110 to 160 beats per minute and is
typically heard as a double sound. Using a standard nonamplified
stethoscope, the fetal heart is audible by 20 weeks in 80 percent of women,
and by 22 weeks, heart sounds are expected to be heard in all (Herbert,
1987). Because the fetus moves freely in amnionic fluid, the site on the
maternal abdomen where fetal heart sounds can be heard best will vary.
Additionally, with ultrasonic auscultation, one may hear the funic souffle,
which is a sharp, whistling sound that is synchronous with the fetal pulse. It
is caused by the rush of blood through the umbilical arteries and may not be
heard consistently. In contrast, the uterine souffle is a soft, blowing sound
that is synchronous with the maternal pulse. It is produced by the passage of
blood through the dilated uterine vessels and is heard most distinctly near the
lower portion of the uterus.

Sonography
Ultrasound imaging provides invaluable information regarding fetal anatomy,
growth, and well-being. As such, it is recommended that all pregnant women
be offered at least one prenatal sonographic examination (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018l). Continuing trends suggest that the
number of these examinations performed per pregnancy is increasing. Data
from commercial insurance plans indicate that even low-risk pregnancies
receive an average of 4 to 5 ultrasound examinations (O’Keeffe, 2013).
Sonography should be performed only for valid medical indications.
Additionally, needed information is obtained using the lowest possible
ultrasound exposure settings, which is the as low as reasonably achievable
(ALARA) principle (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2016).

■ Subsequent Laboratory Tests
If initial results were normal, most tests need not be repeated. Hematocrit or
hemoglobin determination, along with serology for syphilis if it is prevalent
in the population, is repeated at 28 to 32 weeks (Hollier, 2003; Kiss, 2004).

For women at increased risk for HIV acquisition during pregnancy, repeat
testing is recommended in the third trimester, preferably before 36 weeks
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018j). Similarly,
women who engage in behaviors that place them at high risk for hepatitis B
virus infection are retested at the time of delivery. Women who are D (Rh)
negative and are unsensitized should have an antibody screening test repeated
at 28 to 29 weeks. Anti-D immunoglobulin is given if they remain
unsensitized (Chap. 18, p. 354).

Group B Streptococcal Infection
The CDC (2010b) recommends that vaginal and rectal group B streptococcal
(GBS) cultures be obtained in all women between 35 and 37 weeks’
gestation, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020f) endorses this recommendation. Intrapartum antimicrobial
prophylaxis is provided to those whose culture results are positive. Women
with GBS bacteriuria, preterm labor, or a previous infant with invasive
disease are given empirical intrapartum prophylaxis. Trials are in progress
to test an investigational vaccine (Madhi, 2016). These infections are
described further in Chapter 67 (p. 1194).

Gestational Diabetes
All pregnant women are screened for gestational diabetes mellitus, whether
by history, clinical factors, or routine laboratory testing. Although laboratory
testing between 24 and 28 weeks’ gestation is the most sensitive approach,
there may be women at low risk who are less likely to benefit from testing
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d). Gestational
diabetes is discussed in Chapter 60 (p. 1079).

Genetic Screening
Serum screening for fetal aneuploidy is routinely offered to all pregnant
women—in the first trimester at 10 to 14 weeks, in the second trimester at 15
to 20 weeks, or as cell-free DNA screening at any point after 10 weeks
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d).
Additionally, the College recommends that both cystic fibrosis carrier
screening and screening for spinal muscular atrophy should be offered to all
women considering pregnancy or who are currently pregnant, provided that

carrier or disease status is not already known (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologist, 2017b).
Historically, carrier screening for selected genetic abnormalities was
offered only to women at increased risk based on ethnic or racial
background. One example is screening for Tay-Sachs disease in those of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent. However, given our increasingly diverse,
multiethnic society, previous assumptions about carrier risk may no longer
apply. Although ethnicity-specific carrier screening remains an option,
providers should also consider panethnic and expanded carrier screening
strategies (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017c).
These are discussed further in Chapter 17 (p. 342). All genetic screening is
optional, and ideally, genetic carrier screening and counseling should be
performed before pregnancy.

Neural-Tube Defects
Traditionally, screening for neural-tube defects has been performed as part of
second-trimester aneuploidy screening. An elevation of maternal serum
alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) levels then prompted additional evaluation with
ultrasound and/or amniocentesis. With the advent of other screening
modalities for aneuploidy, second-trimester MSAFP testing is less frequently
obtained. For example, the expansion of second-trimester fetal anatomical
surveillance has been used to screen and identify neural-tube defects
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017f).

NUTRITIONAL COUNSELING
■ Weight Gain Recommendations
In 2009, the Institute of Medicine and National Research Council revised
guidelines for weight gain in pregnancy and continued to stratify suggested
weight gain ranges based on prepregnancy body mass index (BMI) (Table
10-4). The same recommendations apply to women in all age, race, and
ethnic groups. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018n) endorses these measures.

TABLE 10-4. Recommendations for Total and Rate of Weight Gain During
Pregnancy

When the initial Institute of Medicine guidelines were formulated,
concern focused on low-birthweight newborns. However, current emphasis
is directed to the obesity epidemic. The specific and relatively narrow range
of recommended weight gains for obese women emphasizes the renewed
interest in lower weight gains during pregnancy. Obesity is associated with
significantly greater risks for gestational hypertension, preeclampsia,
gestational diabetes, macrosomia, cesarean delivery, and other complications
(Chap. 51, p. 905). The risk appears proportionate to prenatal weight gain. In
a Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network cohort of more than 29,000
pregnant women, 51 percent had weight gain above and 21 percent below the
guidelines (Kominiarek, 2018). Those with excessive weight gain had higher
rates of hypertension and cesarean delivery. This risk is even greater in
chronically hypertensive women (Ornaghi, 2018).

Conversely, among 100,000 women with normal prepregnancy BMI,
DeVader and colleagues (2007) found that those who gained <25 lb during
pregnancy had a lower risk for preeclampsia, failed induction, cephalopelvic
disproportion, cesarean delivery, and large-for-gestational age neonates.
This cohort, however, had an increased risk for small-for-gestational age
newborns.

■ Severe Undernutrition
Meaningful studies of nutrition in human pregnancy are exceedingly difficult
to design because experimental dietary deficiency is not ethical. In those
instances in which severe nutritional deficiencies have been induced as a
consequence of social, economic, or political disaster, coincidental events
have often created many variables, the effects of which are not amenable to
quantification. Some past experiences suggest, however, that in otherwise
healthy women, a state of near starvation is required to establish clear
differences in pregnancy outcome. These are discussed in Chapter 47 (p.
827).

■ Weight Retention After Pregnancy
Not all the weight gained during pregnancy is lost during and immediately
after delivery. Schauberger and coworkers (1992) studied prenatal and
postpartum weights in 795 women. Their average weight gain was 28.6 lb or
12.9 kg. As shown in Figure 10-3, most maternal weight loss was at delivery
—approximately 12 lb or 5.4 kg—and in the ensuing 2 weeks—
approximately 9 lb or 4 kg. An additional 5.5 lb or 2.5 kg was lost between 2
weeks and 6 months postpartum. Thus, average retained pregnancy weight
was 2.1 lb or 1 kg. Excessive weight gain is manifest by accrual of fat and
may be partially retained as long-term fat (Berggren, 2016; Widen, 2015).
Overall, the more weight that was gained during pregnancy, the more that
was lost postpartum. And breastfeeding duration is inversely related to
weight retention (Jiang, 2018).

FIGURE 10-3 Cumulative weight loss from last antepartum visit to 6 months postpartum. On average,
1 kg will be retained after pregnancy. *Significantly different from 2-week weight loss; **Significantly
different from 6-week weight loss. (Redrawn with permission from Schauberger CW, Rooney BL,
Brimer LM: Factors that influence weight loss in the puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 79:424, 1992.)

■ Dietary Reference Intakes—Recommended Allowances
Periodically, the Institute of Medicine (2006, 2011) publishes recommended
dietary allowances, including those for pregnant or lactating women. Some of
its latest recommendations are summarized in Table 10-5. Certain prenatal
vitamin–mineral supplements may lead to intakes well in excess of the
recommended allowances. Moreover, the use of excessive supplements,
which often are self-prescribed, has led to concern regarding nutrient
toxicities during pregnancy. Those with potentially toxic effects include
iron, zinc, selenium, and vitamins A, B6, C, and D.
TABLE 10-5. Recommended Daily Dietary Allowances for Pregnant and
Lactating Women

■ Calories

As shown in Figure 10-4, pregnancy requires an additional 80,000 kcal,
mostly during the last 20 weeks. To meet this demand, a caloric increase of
100 to 300 kcal/d is recommended during pregnancy (American Academy of
Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
This greater intake, however, should not be divided equally during the course
of pregnancy. The Institute of Medicine (2006) recommends adding 0, 340,
and 452 kcal/d to the estimated nonpregnant energy requirements in the first,
second, and third trimesters, respectively. The addition of 1000 kcal/d or
more results in fat accrual (Jebeile, 2015).

FIGURE 10-4 Cumulative kilocalories required for pregnancy. (Redrawn with permission from
Chamberlain G, Broughton-Pipkin F [eds]: Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics, 3rd ed. Oxford, Blackwell
Science, 1998.)

Whenever caloric intake is inadequate, protein is metabolized rather than
being spared for its vital role in fetal growth and development. Total
physiological requirements during pregnancy are not necessarily the sum of
ordinary nonpregnant requirements plus those specific to pregnancy. For
example, the additional energy required during pregnancy may be
compensated in whole or in part by reduced physical activity (Hytten, 1991).

■ Protein

Protein requirements rise to meet the demands for growth and remodeling of
the fetus, placenta, uterus, and breasts, and for the expanded maternal blood
volume (Chap. 4, p. 51). During the second half of pregnancy, approximately
1000 g of protein are deposited, amounting to 5 to 6 g/d (Hytten, 1971). To
accomplish this, protein intake that approximates 1 g/kg/d is recommended
(see Table 10-5). Data suggest this should be doubled in late gestation
(Stephens, 2015). Most amino-acid levels in maternal plasma fall markedly,
including ornithine, glycine, taurine, and proline (Hytten, 1991). Exceptions
during pregnancy are glutamic acid and alanine, the concentrations of which
rise.
Preferably, most protein is supplied from animal sources, such as meat,
milk, eggs, cheese, poultry, and fish. These furnish amino acids in optimal
combinations. Milk and dairy products are considered nearly ideal sources
of nutrients, especially protein and calcium, for pregnant or lactating women.
Ingestion of specific fish and potential methylmercury toxicity are discussed
later (p. 188).

■ Minerals
The intakes recommended by the Institute of Medicine (2006) for various
minerals are listed in Table 10-5. With the exception of iron and iodine,
practically all diets that supply sufficient calories for appropriate weight
gain will contain enough minerals to prevent deficiency.
Iron requirements substantively rise during pregnancy, and reasons for
this are discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 60). Of the approximately 300 mg of iron
transferred to the fetus and placenta and the 500 mg incorporated into the
expanding maternal hemoglobin mass, nearly all is used after midpregnancy.
During that time, iron requirements imposed by pregnancy and maternal
excretion total approximately 7 mg/d (Pritchard, 1970). Few women have
sufficient iron stores or dietary intake to supply this amount. Thus, the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017) endorse the recommendation by the National
Academy of Sciences that at least 27 mg of elemental iron be supplemented
daily to pregnant women. This amount is contained in most prenatal vitamins.
As little as 30 mg of elemental iron, supplied as ferrous gluconate,
sulfate, or fumarate, and taken daily throughout the latter half of pregnancy,
provides sufficient iron to meet pregnancy requirements and protect

preexisting iron stores (Scott, 1970). This amount will also provide for iron
requirements of lactation. Notably, in iron preparations, the number of
milligrams of compound is followed by the milligrams of elemental iron,
which is enclosed by parentheses. The pregnant woman may benefit from 60
to 100 mg of elemental iron per day if she is obese, has a multifetal gestation,
begins supplementation late in pregnancy, takes iron irregularly, or has a
depressed hemoglobin level. The woman who is overtly anemic from iron
deficiency responds well to oral supplementation with iron salts. In
response, serum ferritin levels rise more than the hemoglobin concentration
(Daru, 2016).
Iodine also is needed, and the recommended iodine allowance is 220
µg/d (see Table 10-5). The use of iodized salt and bread products is
recommended during pregnancy to offset the increased fetal requirements and
maternal renal losses of iodine. Despite this, iodine intake has declined
substantially in the past 15 years, and in some areas it is probably inadequate
(Caldwell, 2013; Chittimoju, 2019). Severe maternal iodine deficiency
predisposes offspring to endemic cretinism, which is characterized by
multiple severe neurological defects. In parts of China and Africa, where this
condition is common, iodide supplementation very early in pregnancy
prevents some cretinism cases (Cao, 1994). To obviate this, most prenatal
supplements now contain various quantities of iodine (Patel, 2019).
Calcium is retained by the pregnant woman during gestation and
approximates 30 g. Most of this is deposited in the fetus late in pregnancy
(Pitkin, 1985). This amount of calcium represents only approximately 2.5
percent of total maternal calcium, most of which is in bone and can readily
be mobilized for fetal growth. As another potential use, routine calcium
supplementation to prevent preeclampsia is ineffective (Chap. 40, p. 704).
Zinc deficiency if severe may lead to poor appetite, suboptimal growth,
and impaired wound healing. During pregnancy, the recommended daily
intake approximates 12 mg. But, the safe level of zinc supplementation for
pregnant women is not clearly established. Vegetarians have lower zinc
intakes (Foster, 2015). The bulk of studies support zinc supplementation only
in zinc-deficient women in poor-resource countries (Nossier, 2015; Ota,
2015).
Magnesium deficiency as a consequence of pregnancy has not been
recognized. Undoubtedly, during prolonged illness with no magnesium intake,
the plasma level might become critically low, as it would in the absence of

pregnancy. We have observed this deficiency during pregnancies in some
with previous intestinal bypass surgery. Instead, as a preventive agent, Sibai
and colleagues (1989) randomly assigned 400 normotensive primigravidas to
receive 365-mg elemental magnesium supplementation or placebo tablets
from 13 to 24 weeks’ gestation. Supplementation did not improve any
measures of pregnancy outcome.
Trace metals include copper, selenium, chromium, and manganese, which
all have important roles in certain enzyme functions. In general, most are
provided by an average diet. Selenium deficiency is manifested by a
frequently fatal cardiomyopathy in young children and reproductive-aged
women. Conversely, selenium toxicity resulting from oversupplementation
also has been observed. Selenium supplementation is not needed in
American women.
Potassium concentrations in maternal plasma decline by approximately
0.5 mEq/L by midpregnancy (Brown, 1986). Potassium deficiency develops
in the same circumstances as in nonpregnant individuals. One common
example in pregnant women is hyperemesis gravidarum.
Fluoride metabolism is not altered appreciably during pregnancy
(Maheshwari, 1983). Horowitz and Heifetz (1967) concluded that no
additional offspring benefits accrued from maternal ingestion of fluoridated
water if the newborn ingested such water from birth. Sa Roriz Fonteles and
associates (2005) studied microdrill biopsies of deciduous teeth and
concluded that antenatal fluoride provided no additional fluoride uptake
compared with postnatal fluoride alone. Finally, supplemental fluoride
ingested by lactating women does not raise the fluoride concentration in
breast milk (Ekstrand, 1981).

■ Vitamins
The increased requirements for most vitamins during pregnancy shown in
Table 10-5 usually are supplied by any general diet that provides adequate
calories and protein. The exception is folic acid during times of unusual
requirements, such as pregnancy complicated by protracted vomiting,
hemolytic anemia, or multiple fetuses. That said, in impoverished countries,
routine multivitamin supplementation reduced the incidence of lowbirthweight and growth-restricted fetuses but did not alter preterm delivery
or perinatal mortality rates (Fawzi, 2007).

Folic acid supplementation in early pregnancy can lower neural-tube
defect risks (Chap. 15, p. 276). For example, the CDC (2004) estimated that
the number of affected pregnancies had decreased from 4000 per year to
approximately 3000 per year after mandatory fortification of cereal products
with folic acid in 1998. Perhaps more than half of all neural-tube defects can
be prevented with daily intake of 400 µg of folic acid throughout the
periconceptional period (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2019a). Evidence also suggests that folate insufficiency has a global effect on
brain development (Ars, 2016). Putting 140 µg of folic acid into each 100 g
of grain products may increase the folic acid intake of the average American
woman of childbearing age by 100 µg/d. Because nutritional sources alone
are insufficient, however, folic acid supplementation is still recommended.
A woman with a prior child with a neural-tube defect can reduce the 2to 5-percent recurrence risk by more than 70 percent with a daily 4-mg folic
acid supplement taken during the month before conception and during the first
trimester. As emphasized by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), this dose
should be consumed as a separate supplement and not as multivitamin tablets.
This practice avoids excessive intake of fat-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin A, although essential, has been associated with congenital
malformations when taken during pregnancy in high doses (>10,000 IU/d).
These malformations are similar to those produced by the vitamin A
derivative isotretinoin (Accutane), which is a potent teratogen (Chap. 8, p.
155). Beta-carotene, the precursor of vitamin A found in fruits and
vegetables, does not produce vitamin A toxicity. Most prenatal vitamins
contain vitamin A in doses considerably below the teratogenic threshold.
Dietary intake of vitamin A in the United States appears to be adequate, and
additional supplementation is not routinely recommended. In contrast,
vitamin A deficiency is an endemic nutritional problem in the developing
world (McCauley, 2015). Vitamin A deficiency, whether overt or
subclinical, is associated with night blindness and with an increased risk of
maternal anemia and spontaneous preterm birth (West, 2003).
Vitamin B12 plasma levels drop in normal pregnancy, mostly as a result
of reduced plasma levels of their carrier proteins—transcobalamins.
Vitamin B12 occurs naturally only in foods of animal origin, and strict
vegetarians may give birth to neonates whose B12 stores are low. Likewise,

because breast milk of a vegetarian mother contains little vitamin B12, the
deficiency may become profound in the breastfed infant (Higginbottom,
1978). Excessive ingestion of vitamin C also can lead to a functional
deficiency of vitamin B12. Although its role is still controversial, vitamin B12
deficiency may be an independent factor associated with neural-tube defects
(Molloy, 2018).
Vitamin B6, which is pyridoxine, does not require supplementation in
most gravidas (Salam, 2015). For women at high risk for inadequate
nutrition, a daily 2-mg supplement is recommended. As discussed on page
191, vitamin B6, when combined with the antihistamine doxylamine, is
helpful in many cases of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.
Vitamin C allowances during pregnancy are 80 to 85 mg/d—
approximately 20 percent more than when nonpregnant (see Table 10-5). A
reasonable diet should readily provide this amount, and supplementation is
unnecessary (Rumbold, 2015). Maternal plasma levels decline during
pregnancy, whereas cord blood levels are higher. This is a phenomenon
observed with most water-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin. After being metabolized to its active
form, it boosts the efficiency of intestinal calcium absorption and promotes
bone mineralization and growth. Unlike most vitamins that are obtained
exclusively from dietary intake, vitamin D is also synthesized endogenously
with exposure to sunlight. Vitamin D deficiency is common during pregnancy.
This is especially true in high-risk groups such as women with limited sun
exposure, vegetarians, and ethnic minorities—particularly those with darker
skin (Bodnar, 2007). Maternal deficiency can cause disordered skeletal
homeostasis, congenital rickets, and fractures in the newborn (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017j). However, vitamin D
supplementation in women with asthma may decrease the likelihood of
childhood asthma in their offspring (Litonjua, 2016). The Food and Nutrition
Board of the Institute of Medicine (2011) established that an adequate intake
of vitamin D during pregnancy and lactation was 15 µg/d (600 IU/d). In
women suspected of having vitamin D deficiency, serum levels of 25hydroxyvitamin D can be obtained. Even then, the optimal levels in
pregnancy have not been established (De-Regil, 2016).

■ Pragmatic Nutritional Surveillance
Although researchers continue to study the ideal nutritional regimen for the
pregnant woman and her fetus, basic tenets for the clinician include:
1. Advise the pregnant woman to eat food types she wants in reasonable
amounts and salted to taste.
2. Ensure that food is amply available for socioeconomically deprived
women.
3. Monitor weight gain and align goals with the Institute of Medicine
recommendations.
4. Explore food intake by dietary recall periodically to discover the
occasional nutritionally errant diet.
5. Give tablets of simple iron salts that provide at least 30 mg of elemental
iron daily. Give folate supplementation before and in the early weeks of
pregnancy. Provide iodine supplementation in areas of known dietary
insufficiency.
6. Recheck the hematocrit or hemoglobin concentration at 28 to 32 weeks’
gestation to detect significant anemia.

COMMON CONCERNS
■ Employment
More than half of the children in the United States are born to working
mothers. Several federal laws have been passed to protect pregnant workers.
These prohibit employers from excluding women from job categories on the
basis that they are or might become pregnant. The Family and Medical Leave
Act of 1993 requires that covered employers must grant up to 12 work weeks
of unpaid leave to an employee for the birth and care of a newborn child.
In the absence of complications, most women can continue to work until
labor onset (American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017). Some types of work, however, may
increase pregnancy complication risks. According to the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b), risks of preterm birth are
slightly to modestly increased with standing or walking at work >3 hours
daily, lifting and carrying >5 kg, or physically exerting oneself at work. In a

prospective study of more than 900 healthy nulliparas, women who worked
had a fivefold higher risk of preeclampsia (Higgins, 2002). Thus, any
occupation that subjects the gravida to severe physical strain should be
avoided. Ideally, no work or play is continued to the extent that undue fatigue
develops. Adequate periods of rest should be provided.

■ Exercise
In general, pregnant women do not need to limit exercise, provided they do
not become excessively fatigued or risk injury (Davenport, 2016). Clapp and
associates (2000) reported that both placental size and birthweight were
significantly greater in women who exercised. Duncombe and coworkers
(2006) reported similar findings in 148 women. In contrast, Magann and
colleagues (2002) prospectively analyzed exercise behavior in 750 healthy
women and found that working women who exercised had smaller neonates
and more dysfunctional labors.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a)
advises a thorough clinical evaluation before recommending an exercise
program. In the absence of contraindications listed in Table 10-6, pregnant
women are encouraged to engage in regular, moderate-intensity physical
activity for at least 150 minutes each week. Such activity has been shown to
not adversely alter uterine artery Doppler studies (Szymanski, 2018). Each
activity should be reviewed individually for its potential risk. Examples of
safe activities are walking, running, swimming, stationary cycling, and lowimpact aerobics. However, they should refrain from activities with a high
risk of falling or abdominal trauma. Similarly, scuba diving is avoided
because the fetus is at increased risk for decompression sickness (Reid,
2018).
TABLE 10-6. Some Contraindications to Exercise During Pregnancy

In the setting of certain pregnancy complications, it is wise to abstain
from exercise and even limit physical activity. Some women with pregnancyassociated hypertensive disorders, preterm labor, placenta previa, or severe
cardiac or pulmonary disease may accrue advantages from being sedentary.
Also, those with multiple or suspected growth-restricted fetuses may be
served by greater rest.

■ Seafood Consumption
Fish are an excellent source of protein, are low in saturated fats, and contain
omega-3 fatty acids. It is recommended that pregnant women ingest 8 to 12
ounces of fish weekly, but no more than 6 ounces of albacore or “white” tuna
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2019). Because nearly all fish and
shellfish contain trace amounts of mercury, pregnant and lactating women are
advised to avoid specific types of fish with potentially high methylmercury
levels. These include shark, swordfish, king mackerel, and tile fish. If the
mercury content of locally caught fish is unknown, overall fish consumption
should be limited to 6 ounces per week. Finally, to help avert listeriosis,
eating raw or undercooked fish is avoided (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017j).

■ Lead Screening
Maternal lead exposure is associated with several adverse maternal and fetal
outcomes across a range of maternal blood lead levels (Taylor, 2015). These
include gestational hypertension, miscarriage, low birthweight, and
neurodevelopmental impairments in exposed pregnancies. The levels at
which these risks rise remains unclear. However, recognizing that such
exposure remains a significant health issue for reproductive-aged women, the
CDC (2010a) provides guidance for screening and managing exposed
pregnant and lactating women. These guidelines, which have been endorsed
by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018f),
recommend blood lead testing only if a risk factor is identified. If the levels
are >5 µg/dL, the lead source is sought and removed. Subsequent blood
levels are obtained. Blood lead levels >45 µg/dL are consistent with lead
poisoning, and women in this group may be candidates for chelation therapy.
Affected pregnancies are best managed in consultation with lead poisoning

treatment experts. National and state resources are available at the CDC
website: www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/.

■ Automobile and Air Travel
Pregnant women are encouraged to wear properly positioned three-point
restraints as protection against automobile accident injury (Chap. 50, p. 892).
The lap portion of the restraining belt is placed under the abdomen and
across her upper thighs. The belt should be comfortably snug. The shoulder
belt also is firmly positioned between the breasts. Airbags should not be
disabled for the pregnant woman.
In general, air travel in a properly pressurized aircraft has no harmful
effect on pregnancy. Thus, in the absence of obstetrical or medical
complications, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a) has concluded that pregnant women can safely fly up to 36 weeks’
gestation. It is recommended that they observe the same precautions for air
travel as the general population. Seatbelts are used while seated. Support
stockings, periodic lower extremity movement, and at least hourly
ambulation help lower the venous thromboembolism threat. Significant risks
with travel, especially international travel, are infectious disease acquisition
and development of complications remote from adequate health-care
resources.

■ Coitus
In healthy pregnant women, sexual intercourse usually is not harmful.
Whenever miscarriage, placenta previa, or preterm labor threatens, however,
coitus is avoided. Nearly 10,000 women enrolled in a prospective
investigation by the Vaginal Infection and Prematurity Study Group were
interviewed regarding sexual activity (Read, 1993). They reported a
decreased frequency of coitus with advancing gestation. By 36 weeks, 72
percent had intercourse less than once weekly. The decline is attributed to
lower desire and fear of harming the pregnancy (Staruch, 2016).
Intercourse specifically late in pregnancy is not harmful. Sayle and
colleagues (2001) reported no increased—and actually a decreased—risk of
delivery within 2 weeks of intercourse. Tan and associates (2007) studied
women scheduled for nonurgent labor induction and found that spontaneous

labor ensued at equal rates in groups either participating in or abstaining
from intercourse.
Oral-vaginal intercourse is occasionally hazardous. Aronson and Nelson
(1967) described a fatal air embolism late in pregnancy as a result of air
blown into the vagina during cunnilingus. Other near-fatal cases have been
described (Bernhardt, 1988).

■ Dental Care
Examination of the teeth is included in the prenatal examination, and good
dental hygiene is encouraged. Indeed, periodontal disease is linked to
preterm labor. Unfortunately, although its treatment improves dental health, it
does not prevent preterm birth (Daalderop, 2018). Dental caries are not
aggravated by pregnancy. Importantly, pregnancy is not a contraindication to
dental treatment including dental radiographs (American Academy of
Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).

■ Immunization
Current recommendations for immunization during pregnancy are summarized
in Table 10-7. Well-publicized concerns regarding a causal link between
childhood exposure to the thimerosal preservative in some vaccines and
neuropsychological disorders have led some parents to vaccine prohibition.
Although controversy continues, these associations have been proven
groundless. Thus, many vaccines may be used in pregnancy (Munoz, 2019).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) stresses
the importance of integrating an effective vaccine strategy into the care of
both obstetrical and gynecological patients. The College further emphasizes
that information on the safety of vaccines given during pregnancy is subject to
change, and recommendations can be found on the CDC website at
www.cdc.gov/vaccines.
TABLE 10-7. Recommendations for Immunization During Pregnancy and
Postpartum

Influenza and tetanus–diphtheria–acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccinations
are recommended routinely for all pregnant women (Munoz, 2019; Sperling,
2018b). Others are recommended for specific indications (see Table 10-7).
Women who are susceptible to rubella should receive measles, mumps, and
rubella (MMR) vaccination postpartum. This vaccine is contraindicated
during pregnancy.

■ Caffeine
Whether adverse pregnancy outcomes are related to caffeine consumption is
somewhat controversial. As summarized from Chapter 11 (p. 200), heavy
intake of coffee each day—approximately five cups or 500 mg of caffeine—
slightly raises the miscarriage risk. Studies of “moderate” intake—less than
200 mg daily—did not find a higher risk.
It is unclear if caffeine consumption is associated with preterm birth or
impaired fetal growth. Clausson and coworkers (2002) found no association
between caffeine consumption <500 mg/d and low birthweight, fetal-growth
restriction, or preterm delivery. Bech and associates (2007) randomly
assigned more than 1200 pregnant women who drank at least three cups of
coffee per day to caffeinated versus decaffeinated coffee. They found no
difference in birthweight or gestational age at delivery between groups. The
CARE Study Group (2008), however, evaluated 2635 low-risk pregnancies
and reported a 1.4-fold risk for fetal-growth restriction among those whose
daily caffeine consumption was >200 mg/d compared with those who
consumed <100 mg/d. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018g) concludes that moderate consumption of caffeine—
less than 200 mg/d—does not appear to be associated with miscarriage or
preterm birth, but that the relationship between caffeine consumption and
fetal-growth restriction remains unsettled.

■ Nausea and Heartburn
Nausea and vomiting are common complaints during the first half of
pregnancy. These vary in severity and usually commence between the first
and second missed menstrual period and continue until 14 to 16 weeks’
gestation. Although nausea and vomiting tend to be worse in the morning—
thus termed morning sickness—both symptoms frequently continue

throughout the day. Lacroix and associates (2000) found that nausea and
vomiting were reported by three fourths of pregnant women and lasted an
average of 35 days. Half had relief by 14 weeks’ gestation, and 90 percent
by 22 weeks’ gestation. In 80 percent of these women, nausea lasted all day.
Treatment of pregnancy-associated nausea and vomiting seldom provides
complete relief, but symptoms can be minimized. Eating small meals at
frequent intervals is valuable. One systematic literature search reported that
the herbal remedy ginger was likely effective (Borrelli, 2005). Mild
symptoms usually respond to vitamin B6 given with doxylamine, but some
women require phenothiazine or H1-receptor blocking antiemetics (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018h). In some with
hyperemesis gravidarum, vomiting is so severe that dehydration, electrolyte
and acid-base disturbances, and starvation ketosis become serious problems
(Chap. 57, p. 1014).
Heartburn is another common complaint of gravidas and is caused by
gastric content reflux into the lower esophagus. The greater frequency of
regurgitation during pregnancy most likely results from upward displacement
and compression of the stomach by the uterus, combined with relaxation of
the lower esophageal sphincter. Avoiding bending over or lying flat can be
preventive. In most pregnant women, symptoms are mild and relieved by a
regimen of more frequent but smaller meals. Antacids may provide
considerable relief (Phupong, 2015). Specifically, aluminum hydroxide,
magnesium trisilicate, or magnesium hydroxide are given alone or in
combination. Management of heartburn or nausea that does not respond to
simple measures is discussed in Chapter 57 (p. 1017).

■ Pica and Ptyalism
The craving for strange foods is termed pica. Worldwide, its prevalence
among pregnant women is estimated to be 30 percent (Fawcett, 2016). At
times, nonfoods such as ice (pagophagia), starch (amylophagia), or clay
(geophagia) may predominate. This desire is considered by some to be
triggered by severe iron deficiency (Epler, 2017). Although such cravings
usually abate after deficiency correction, not all pregnant women with pica
are iron deficient. Indeed, if strange “foods” dominate the diet, iron
deficiency will be aggravated or will develop eventually. Patel and

colleagues (2004) prospectively completed a dietary inventory on more than
3000 women during the second trimester. The prevalence of pica was 4
percent. The most common nonfood items ingested were starch in 64 percent,
dirt in 14 percent, sourdough in 9 percent, and ice in 5 percent.
Women during pregnancy are occasionally distressed by profuse
salivation—ptyalism. Although usually unexplained, ptyalism sometimes
appears to follow salivary gland stimulation by the ingestion of starch. It
commonly occurs with hyperemesis gravidarum (Bronshtein, 2018).

■ Headache or Backache
Headaches are common in pregnancy. At least 5 percent of pregnancies are
estimated to be complicated by new-onset or new-type headache (Spierings,
2016). Acetaminophen is suitable for treatment of most, and an in-depth
discussion is found in Chapter 63 (p. 1127).
Low back pain to some extent is reported by nearly 70 percent of
gravidas (Liddle, 2015). Minor degrees follow excessive strain or
significant bending, lifting, or walking. It can be reduced by squatting rather
than bending when reaching down, by using a back-support pillow when
sitting, and by avoiding high-heeled shoes. Back pain complaints increase
with progressing gestation and are more prevalent in obese women and those
with a history of low back pain. In some cases, troublesome pain may persist
for years after the pregnancy (Norén, 2002).
Severe back pain should not be attributed simply to pregnancy until a
thorough orthopedic examination has been conducted. Severe pain has other
uncommon causes that include pregnancy-associated osteoporosis, disc
disease, vertebral osteoarthritis, or septic arthritis (Smith, 2008). More
commonly, muscular spasm and tenderness are classified clinically as acute
strain or fibrositis. Although evidence-based clinical research directing care
in pregnancy is limited, low back pain usually responds well to analgesics,
heat, and rest. Acetaminophen may be used as needed. Nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs also may be beneficial but are used only in short
courses to avoid fetal effects (Chap. 8, p. 151). Muscle relaxants that include
cyclobenzaprine or baclofen may be added when needed. Once acute pain is
improved, stabilizing and strengthening exercises provided by physical
therapy help improve spine and hip stability, which is essential for the

increased load of pregnancy. For some, a support belt that stabilizes the
sacroiliac joint may be helpful (Gutke, 2015).

■ Varicosities and Hemorrhoids
Venous leg varicosities have a congenital predisposition and accrue with
advancing age. They can be aggravated by factors that raise lower-extremity
venous pressures, such as an enlarging uterus. Femoral venous pressures in
the supine gravida rise from 8 mm Hg in early pregnancy to 24 mm Hg at
term. Thus, leg varicosities typically worsen as pregnancy advances,
especially with prolonged standing. Symptoms vary from cosmetic blemishes
and mild discomfort at the end of the day to severe discomfort that requires
prolonged rest with feet elevation. Treatment is generally limited to periodic
rest with leg elevation, elastic stockings, or both. Surgical correction during
pregnancy generally is not advised, although rarely the symptoms may be so
severe that injection, ligation, or even stripping of the veins is necessary.
Superficial varicosities are a risk factor for deep-vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism (Chap. 55, p. 980).
Vulvar varicosities frequently coexist with leg varicosities, but they may
appear without other venous pathology. Uncommonly, they become massive
and almost incapacitating (Pratilas, 2018). If these large varicosities rupture,
either spontaneously or at the time of delivery, blood loss can be severe.
Treatment is with specially fitted pantyhose that will also minimize lower
extremity varicosities. With particularly bothersome vulvar varicosities, a
foam rubber pad suspended across the vulva by a belt can be used to exert
pressure on the dilated veins.
Hemorrhoids are rectal vein varicosities and may first appear during
pregnancy as pelvic venous pressures rise. Commonly, they are recurrences
of previously encountered hemorrhoids. Up to 40 percent of pregnant women
develop these (Poskus, 2014). Pain and swelling usually are relieved by
topically applied anesthetics, warm soaks, and stool-softening agents. With
thrombosis of an external hemorrhoid, pain can be considerable. This may be
relieved by incision and removal of the clot following injection of a local
anesthetic.

■ Sleeping and Fatigue

Beginning early in pregnancy, many women experience fatigue and need
greater amounts of sleep. The soporific effect of progesterone contributes but
may be compounded in the first trimester by nausea and vomiting. In the latter
stages, general discomforts, urinary frequency, and dyspnea can be additive.
Sleep-disordered breathing may be associated with significant morbidities
such as hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, stillbirth, and preterm delivery
(Brown, 2018; Dominguez, 2018). Moreover, sleep efficiency appears to
progressively diminish as pregnancy advances. Wilson and associates (2011)
performed overnight polysomnography and observed that women in the third
trimester had poorer sleep efficiency, more awakenings, and less of both
stage 4 (deep) and rapid-eye-movement sleep. Women in the first trimester
also were affected, but to a lesser extent. Daytime naps and mild sedatives at
bedtime such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) can be helpful.

■ Cord Blood Banking
Cord blood contains hemopoietic stem cells that can be used to treat more
than 70 types of diseases. These include immunological and genetic diseases
and some forms of cancer. Of the two cord blood bank types, public banks
promote allogeneic donation, for use by a related or unrelated recipient,
similar to blood product donation. Private banks store stem cells for future
autologous use and charge fees for initial processing and annual storage.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) has
concluded that if a woman requests data on umbilical cord banking,
information regarding advantages and disadvantages of public versus private
banking should be explained. Some states have passed laws that require
physicians to inform patients about cord blood banking options. Importantly,
few transplants have been performed by using cord blood stored in the
absence of a known indication in the recipient (Screnci, 2016). The
likelihood that cord blood would be used for the child or family member of
the donor couple is considered remote. Instead, it is recommended that
directed donation be considered when an immediate family member carries
the diagnosis of a specific condition known to be treatable by hemopoietic
transplantation.

REFERENCES

Afshar Y, Wang E, Mei J, et al: Childbirth education class and birth plans are associated with a vaginal
delivery. Birth 44(1):29, 2017
Ahmad F, Hogg-Johnson S, Stewart D, et al: Computer-assisted screening for intimate partner violence
and control. Ann Intern Med 151(2):94, 2009
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Avoiding inappropriate clinical decisions based on
false-positive human chorionic gonadotropin test results. Committee Opinion No. 278, November
2002, Reaffirmed 2017a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening in the age of genomic
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 690, March 2017c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Method for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2017e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Opioid use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Update on seafood consumption during
pregnancy. ACOG Practice Advisory, 2017j
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vitamin D: screening and supplementation during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 495, July 2011, Reaffirmed 2017k
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Air travel during pregnancy. Committee Opinion
No. 746, August 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Employment considerations during pregnancy and
the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 733, April 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Group prenatal care. Committee Opinion No.
731, March 2018d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Lead screening during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 533, August 2012, Reaffirmed 2018f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Moderate caffeine consumption during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 462, August 2010, Reaffirmed 2018g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 189, January 2018h
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing postpartum care. Committee Opinion
No. 736, May 2018i
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal and perinatal human immunodeficiency
virus testing. Committee Opinion No. 752, September 2018j
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2018l
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Weight gain during pregnancy. Committee
Opinion No. 548, January 2013, Reaffirmed 2018n
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intimate partner violence. Committee Opinion
No. 518, February 2012, Reaffirmed 2019c

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational diabetes mellitus. Practice Bulletin.
No. 190, Feburary 2018, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 804, March 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Smoking cessation during pregnancy. Committee
Opinion No. 807, April 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Immunization implementation strategies for
Obstetrician-Gynecologists. Committee Opinion No. 772, February 2019, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No. 226, August 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Umbilical cord blood banking. Committee Opinion
No. 771, February 2019, Reaffirmed 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, January 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist: Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD)
prevention program. 2021a. Available at: www.acog.org/programs/fasd. Accessed October 5, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Fetal growth restriction. Practice Bulletin No.
227, January 2021b
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Recommended maximum scanning times for displayed
thermal index (TI) values. 2016. Available at: www.aium.org/officialStatements/65. Accessed
October 8, 2019
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Smoking and infertility: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril
110(4):611, 2018
Aronson ME, Nelson PK: Fatal air embolism in pregnancy resulting from an unusual sex act. Obstet
Gynecol 30:127, 1967
Ars CL, Nijs IM, Marroun HE, et al: Prenatal folate, homocysteine and vitamin B12 levels and child
brain volumes, cognitive development and psychological functioning: the Generation R Study. Br J
Nutr 22:1, 2016
Barnhart KT, Guo W, Cary MS, et al: Differences in serum human chorionic gonadotropin rise in early
pregnancy by race and value at presentation. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):504, 2016
Bech BH, Obel C, Henriksen TB, et al: Effect of reducing caffeine intake on birth weight and length of
gestation: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 335:409, 2007
Berg CJ, Callaghan WM, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 1998 to
2005. Obstet Gynecol 116(6):1302, 2010
Berggren EK, Groh-Wargo S, Presley L, et al: Maternal fat, but not lean, mass is increased among
overweight/obese women with excess gestational weight gain. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):745.e1,
2016
Berlin I, Grangé G, Jacob N, et al: Nicotine patches in pregnant smokers: randomized, placebo
controlled, multicentre trial of efficacy. BMJ 348:g1622, 2014
Bernhardt TL, Goldmann RW, Thombs PA, et al: Hyperbaric oxygen treatment of cerebral air embolism
from orogenital sex during pregnancy. Crit Care Med 16:729, 1988
Bleich AT, Sheffield JS, Wendel GD Jr, et al: Disseminated gonococcal infection in women. Obstet
Gynecol 119(3):597, 2012
Bobdiwala S, Saso S, Verbakel JY, et al: Diagnostic protocols for the management of pregnancy of
unknown location: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 126(2): 190, 2019

Bodnar LM, Simhan HN, Powers RW, et al: High prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency in black and
white pregnant women residing in the northern United States and their neonates. J Nutr 137(2):447,
2007
Borrelli F, Capasso R, Aviello G, et al: Effectiveness and safety of ginger in the treatment of pregnancyinduced nausea and vomiting. Obstet Gynecol 105:849, 2005
Braunstein GD: The long gestation of the modern home pregnancy test. Clin Chem 60(1):18, 2014
Bronshtein M, Gover A, Beloosesky R, et al: Characteristics and outcomes of ptyalism gravidarum. Isr
Med Assoc J 20(9):573, 2018
Brown MA, Sinosich MJ, Saunders DM, et al: Potassium regulation and progesterone-aldosterone
interrelationships in human pregnancy: a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 155:349, 1986
Brown NT, Turner JM, Kumar S: The intrapartum and perinatal risks of sleep-disordered breathing in
pregnancy: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(2):147, 2018
Cao XY, Jiang XM, Dou ZH, et al: Timing of vulnerability of the brain to iodine deficiency in endemic
cretinism. N Engl J Med 331:1739, 1994
CARE Study Group: Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of fetal growth restriction: a
large prospective observational study. BMJ 337:a2332, 2008
Carter EB, Barbier K, Sarabia R, et al: Group versus traditional prenatal care in low-risk women
delivering at term: a retrospective cohort study. J Perinatol 37(7):769, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Spina bifida and anencephaly before and after folic acid
mandate—United States, 1995–1996 and 1999–2000. MMWR 53(17):362, 2004
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidelines for the identification and management of lead
exposure in pregnant and lactating women. 2010a. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/publications/leadandpregnancy2010.pdf. Accessed October 8, 2019
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal disease:
revised guidelines from CDC, 2010b. MMWR 59(10):1, 2010b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: General recommendations on immunization—
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 60(2):1,
2011
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Folic acid: birth defects COUNT. 2019a. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefectscount/basics.html. Accessed October 8, 2019
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Weight gain during pregnancy. 2019b. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pregnancy-weight-gain.htm. Accessed
October 8, 2019
Chamberlain G, Broughton-Pipkin F (eds): Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics, 3rd ed. Oxford, Blackwell
Science, 1998
Chen PH, Rovi S, Washington J, et al: Randomized comparison of 3 methods to screen for domestic
violence in family practice. Ann Fam Med 5(5):430, 2007
Chittimoju SB, Pearce EN: Iodine deficiency and supplementation in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol
62(2):330, 2019
Caldwell KL, Pan Y, Mortensen ME, et al: Iodine status in pregnant women in the National Children’s
Study and in U.S. women (15-44 years), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2005–
2010. Thyroid 23(8):927, 2013
Clapp JF III, Kim H, Burciu B, et al: Beginning regular exercise in early pregnancy: effect on
fetoplacental growth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1484, 2000
Clausson B, Granath F, Ekbom A, et al: Effect of caffeine exposure during pregnancy on birth weight
and gestational age. Am J Epidemiol 155:429, 2002

Coker AL, Garcia LS, Williams CM, et al: Universal psychosocial screening and adverse pregnancy
outcomes in an academic obstetric clinic. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1180, 2012
Cole LA: The utility of six over-the-counter (home) pregnancy tests. Clin Chem Lab Med 49(8): 1317,
2011
Coleman T, Chamberlain C, Davey MA, et al: Pharmacological interventions for promoting smoking
cessation during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD010078, 2015
Cooper S, Taggar J, Lewis S, et al: Effect of nicotine patches in pregnancy on infant and maternal
outcomes at 2 years: follow-up from the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled SNAP trial.
Lancet Respir Med 2(9):728, 2014
Daalderop LA, Wieland BV, Tomsin K, et al: Periodontal disease and pregnancy outcomes: overview of
systematic reviews. JDR Clin Trans Res 3(1):10, 2018
Dahlin S, Gunnerbeck A, Wikström AK, et al: Maternal tobacco use and extremely premature birth–a
population-based cohort study. BJOG 123(12):1938, 2016
Daru K, Cooper NA, Khan KS: Systematic review of randomized trials of the effect of iron
supplementation on iron stores and oxygen carrying capacity in pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 95(3):270, 2016
Davenport MH, Skow RJ, Steinback CD: Maternal responses to aerobic exercise in pregnancy. Clin
Obstet Gynecol 59(3):541, 2016
Denny CH, Acero CS, Naimi TS, et al: Consumption of alcohol beverages and binge drinking among
pregnant women aged 18–44 years—United States, 2015–2017. MMWR 68(16):365, 2019
De-Regil LM, Palacios C, Lombardo LK, et al: Vitamin D supplementation for women during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD008873, 2016
DeVader SR, Neeley HL, Myles TD, et al: Evaluation of gestational weight gain guidelines for women
with normal prepregnancy body mass index. Obstet Gynecol 110:745, 2007
Dominguez JE, Street L, Louis J: Management of obstructive sleep apnea in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am 45(2):233, 2018
Drake P, Driscoll AK, Mathews TJ: Cigarette Smoking During Pregnancy: United States, 2016. NCHS
Data Brief 305:1, 2018
Duncombe D, Skouteris H, Wertheim EH, et al: Vigorous exercise and birth outcomes in a sample of
recreational exercisers: a prospective study across pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 46:288,
2006
Ekstrand J, Boreus LO, de Chateau P: No evidence of transfer of fluoride from plasma to breast milk.
BMJ (Clin Res Ed) 283:761, 1981
Epler KE, Pierce A, Rappaport VJ: Pica in pregnancy: an unusual presentation. Obstet Gynecol
130(6):1377, 2017
Eriksen JL, Pilliod RA, Caughey AB: Impact of late initiation of prenatal care on pregnancy outcomes
among women who use drugs. Abstract No. 732. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:S384, 2016
Fawcett EJ, Fawcett JM, Mazmanian D: A meta-analysis of the worldwide prevalence of pica during
pregnancy and the postpartum period. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 133(3):277, 2016
Fawzi WW, Msamanga GI, Urassa W, et al: Vitamins and perinatal outcomes among HIV-negative
women in Tanzania. N Engl J Med 356:14, 2007
Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al: Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update. 2008.
Available at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK63952/. Accessed October 15, 2019
Fleming N, O’Driscoll T, Becker G, et al: Adolescent pregnancy guidelines. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
37(8):740, 2015

Foster M, Herulah UN, Prasad A, et al: Zinc status of vegetarians during pregnancy: a systematic
review of observational studies and meta-analysis of zinc intake. Nutrients 7(6):4512, 2015
Goldenberg RL, McClure EM: Importance of prenatal care in reducing stillbirth. BJOG 125(2):148, 2018
Gregory KD, Johnson CT, Johnson TR, et al: The content of prenatal care. Women’s Health Issues
16:198, 2006
Grenache DG: Variable accuracy of home pregnancy tests: truth in advertising? Clin Chem Lab Med
53(3):339, 2015
Grohskopf LA, Alyanak E, Broder KR, et al: Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with
vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States,
2019–20 influenza season. MMWR 68(3):1, 2019
Gutke A, Betten C, Degerskär K, et al: Treatments for pregnancy-related lumbopelvic pain: a
systematic review of physiotherapy modalities. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(11):1156, 2015
Haragan AF, Hulsey TC, Hawk AF, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of fundal height and handheld
ultrasound-measured abdominal circumference to screen for fetal growth abnormalities. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 212(6):820.e1, 2015
Herbert WN, Bruninghaus HM, Barefoot AB, et al: Clinical aspects of fetal heart auscultation. Obstet
Gynecol 69:574, 1987
Higginbottom MC, Sweetman L, Nyhan WL: A syndrome of methylmalonic aciduria, homocystinuria,
megaloblastic anemia and neurologic abnormalities in a vitamin B12-deficient breast-fed infant of a
strict vegetarian. N Engl J Med 299:317, 1978
Higgins JR, Walshe JJ, Conroy RM, et al: The relation between maternal work, ambulatory blood
pressure, and pregnancy hypertension. J Epidemiol Community Health 56:389, 2002
Hollier LM, Hill J, Sheffield JS, et al: State laws regarding prenatal syphilis screening in the United
States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1178, 2003
Horowitz HS, Heifetz SB: Effects of prenatal exposure to fluoridation on dental caries. Public Health
Rep 82:297, 1967
Hytten FE, Chamberlain G (eds): Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics, 2nd ed. Oxford, Blackwell, 1991
Hytten FE, Leitch I: The Physiology of Human Pregnancy, 2nd ed. Oxford, Blackwell, 1971
Ickovics JR, Earnshaw V, Lewis JB, et al: Cluster randomized controlled trial of group prenatal care:
perinatal outcomes among adolescents in New York City health centers. Am J Public Health
106(2):359, 2016
Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements.
Washington, The National Academies Press, 2006
Institute of Medicine: DRI Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, The
National Academies Press, 2011
Institute of Medicine and National Research Council: Weight Gain During Pregnancy: Reexamining the
Guidelines. Washington, The National Academic Press, 2009
Jebeile H, Mijatovic J, Louie JC, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of energy intake and
weight gain in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(4):465, 2015
Jiang M, Gao H, Vinyes-Pares G, et al: Association between breastfeeding duration and postpartum
weight retention of lactating mothers: A meta-analysis of cohort studies. Clin Nutr 37(4):1224, 2018
Johnson S, Cushion M, Bond S, et al: Comparison of analytical sensitivity and women’s interpretation of
home pregnancy tests. Clin Chem Lab Med 53(3):391, 2015
Kapaya M, D’Angelo DV, Tong VT, et al: Use of electronic vapor products before, during, and after
pregnancy among women with a recent live birth–Oklahoma and Texas, 2015. MMWR 68(8):189,
2019

Kim DK, Bridges CB, Harriman KH, et al: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
recommended immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2016.
MMWR 65(4):88, 2016
Kim DK, Hunter P: Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended immunization
schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2019. MMWR 68(5):115, 2019
Kiss H, Widham A, Geusau A, et al: Universal antenatal screening for syphilis: is it still justified
economically? A 10-year retrospective analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 112:24, 2004
Kominiarek MA, Saade G, Mele L, et al: Association between gestational weight gain and perinatal
outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):875, 2018
Lacroix R, Eason E, Melzack R: Nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: a prospective study of its
frequency, intensity, and patterns of change. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:931, 2000
Leveno KJ, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Decreased preterm births in an inner-city public hospital.
Obstet Gynecol 113(3):578, 2009
Liddle SD, Pennick V: Interventions for preventing and treating low-back and pelvic pain during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD001139, 2015
Litonjua AA, Carey VJ, Laranjo N, et al: Effect of prenatal supplementation with vitamin D on asthma
or recurrent wheezing in offspring by age 3 years: the VDAART randomized clinical trial. JAMA
315(4):362, 2016
Loudon I: Death in Childbirth. New York, Oxford University Press, 1992
Luke S, Kirby RS: Timing of maternal tobacco exposure, hypertension, and risk of singleton small-forgestational age infants. Am J Perinatol 35(3):215, 2018
Madhi SA, Cutland CL, Jose L, et al: Safety and immunogenicity of an investigational maternal trivalent
group B streptococcus vaccine in healthy women and their infants: a randomised phase 1b/2 trial.
Lancet Infect Dis 16(8):923, 2016
Magann EF, Evans SF, Weitz B, et al: Antepartum, intrapartum, and neonatal significance of exercise on
healthy low-risk pregnant working women. Obstet Gynecol 99:466, 2002
Maheshwari UR, King JC, Leybin L, et al: Fluoride balances during early and late pregnancy. J Occup
Med 25:587, 1983
Margulies R, Miller L: Fruit size as a model for teaching first trimester uterine sizing in bimanual
examination. Obstet Gynecol 98(2):341, 2001
May PA, Chambers CD, Kalberg WO, et al: Prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders in 4 US
communities. JAMA 319(5):474, 2018
McCash SI, Goldfrank DJ, Pessin MS, et al: Reducing false-positive pregnancy test results in patients
with cancer. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):825, 2017
McCauley ME, van den Broek N, Dou L, et al: Vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy for
maternal and newborn outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD008666, 2015
Metz TD, Stickrath EH: Marijuana use in pregnancy and lactation: a review of the evidence. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 213(6):761, 2015
Miller E, McCaw B: Intimate partner violence. N Engl J Med 380(9):850, 2019
Molloy AM: Should vitamin B12 status be considered in assessing risk of neural tube defects. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1414(1):109, 2018
Munoz FM, Jamieson DJ: Maternal immunization. Obstet Gynecol 133(4):739, 2019
Murray N, Homer CS, Davis GK, et al: The clinical utility of routine urinalysis in pregnancy: a
prospective study. Med J Aust 177:477, 2002

Nanovskaya TN, Oncken C, Fokina VM, et al: Bupropion sustained release for pregnant smokers: a
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(4):2017
Norén L, Östgaard S, Johansson G, et al: Lumbar back and posterior pelvic pain during pregnancy: a 3year follow-up. Eur Spine J 11:267, 2002
Nossier SA, Naeim NE, El-Sayed NA, et al: The effect of zinc supplementation on pregnancy
outcomes: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial, Egypt. Br J Nutr 114(2):274, 2015
O’Keeffe DF, Abuhamad A: Obstetric ultrasound utilization in the United States: data from various
health plans. Semin Perinatol 37(5):292, 2013
Olson AL, Boardman MB, Johnson DJ: Smoke-free moms: financial rewards for smoking cessation by
low-income rural pregnant women. Am J Prev Med 56(6):852, 2019
Ornaghi S, Algeri P, Todyrenchuk L, et al: Impact of excessive pre-pregnancy body mass index and
abnormal gestational weight gain on pregnancy outcomes in women with chronic hypertension.
Pregnancy Hypertens 12:90, 2018
Osterman MJ, Martin JA: Timing and adequacy of prenatal care in the United States, 2016. Natl Vital
Stat Rep 67(3):1, 2018
Ota E, Mori R, Middleton P, et al: Zinc supplementation for improving pregnancy and infant outcome.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD000230, 2015
Partridge S, Balayla J, Holcroft CA, et al: Inadequate prenatal care utilization and risks of infant
mortality and poor birth outcome: a retrospective analysis of 28,729,765 U.S. deliveries over 8 years.
Am J Perinatol 29(10):787, 2012
Patel A, Lee SY, Stagnaro-Green A, et al: Iodine content of the best-selling United States adult and
prenatal multivitamin preparations. Thyroid 29(1):124, 2019
Patel MV, Nuthalapaty FS, Ramsey PS, et al: Pica: a neglected risk factor for preterm birth. Obstet
Gynecol 103:68S, 2004
Patnode CD, Henderson JT, Thompson JH, et al: Behavioral counseling and pharmacotherapy
interventions for tobacco cessation in adults, including pregnant women: a review of reviews for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 163(8):608, 2015
Phupong V, Hanprasertpong T: Interventions for heartburn in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
9:CD011379, 2015
Pitkin RM: Calcium metabolism in pregnancy and the perinatal period: a review. Am J Obstet Gynecol
151:99, 1985
Poskus T, Buzinskiene D, Drasutiene G, et al: Haemorrhoids and anal fissures during pregnancy and
after childbirth: a prospective cohort study. BJOG 121(13):1666, 2014
Power ML, Wilson EK, Hogan SO, et al: Patterns of preconception, prenatal and postnatal care for
diabetic women by obstetrician-gynecologists. J Reprod Med 58(1-2):7, 2013
Pratilas GC, Dinas K: Severe vulvovaginal varicosities in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 378(22):2123, 2018
Pritchard JA, Scott DE: Iron demands during pregnancy. In Hallberg L, Harwerth HG, Vannotti A (eds):
Iron Deficiency: Pathogenesis, Clinical Aspects, Therapy. New York, Academic Press, 1970
Read JS, Klebanoff MA: Sexual intercourse during pregnancy and preterm delivery: effects of vaginal
microorganisms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:514, 1993
Reid RL, Lorenzo M: SCUBA diving in pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(11):1490, 2018
Reiss HE: History, John William Ballantyne 1861–1923. J Obstet Gynecol 20(4):343, 2000
Rumbold A, Ota E, Nagata C, et al: Vitamin C supplementation in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 9:CD004072, 2015
Sa Roriz Fonteles C, Zero DT, Moss ME, et al: Fluoride concentrations in enamel and dentin of primary
teeth after pre- and postnatal fluoride exposure. Caries Res 39:505, 2005

Salam RA, Zuberi NF, Bhutta ZA: Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) supplementation during pregnancy or labour
for maternal and neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD000179, 2015
Sarman I: Review shows that early foetal alcohol exposure may cause adverse effects even when the
mother consumes low levels. Acta Paediatr 107(6):938, 2018
Sayle AE, Savitz DA, Thorp JM Jr, et al: Sexual activity during late pregnancy and risk of preterm
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 97:283, 2001
Schauberger CW, Rooney BL, Brimer LM: Factors that influence weight loss in the puerperium. Obstet
Gynecol 79:424, 1992
Scott DE, Pritchard JA, Satin AS, et al: Iron deficiency during pregnancy. In Hallberg L, Harwerth HG,
Vannotti A (eds): Iron Deficiency: Pathogenesis, Clinical Aspects, Therapy. New York, Academic
Press, 1970
Screnci M, Murgi E, Valle V, et al: Sibling cord blood donor program for hematopoietic cell
transplantation: the 20-year experience in the Rome Cord Blood Bank. Blood Cells Mol Dis 57:71,
2016
Sibai BM, Villar MA, Bray E: Magnesium supplementation during pregnancy: a double-blind randomized
controlled clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:115, 1989
Siu AL, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for
tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med 163(8):622, 2015
Smith MW, Marcus PS, Wurtz LD: Orthopedic issues in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 63:103, 2008
Soneji S, Beltrán-Sánchez H: Association of maternal cigarette smoking and smoking cessation with
preterm birth. JAMA Netw Open 2(4):e192514, 2019
Sperling JD, Maggio L, Has P, et al: Prenatal care adherence and neonatal intensive care unit admission
or stillbirth among women with gestational and preexisting diabetes mellitus. Am J Perinatol
35(2):103, 2018a
Sperling RS, Riley LE, Immunization and Emerging Infections Expert Work Group: Influenza
vaccination, pregnancy safety, and risk of early pregnancy loss. Obstet Gynecol 131(5):799, 2018b
Spierings EL, Sabin TD: De novo headache during pregnancy and puerperium. Neurologist 21(1):1, 2016
Spindel ER, McEvoy CT: The role of nicotine in the effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
lung development and childhood respiratory disease: implications for dangers of E-cigarettes. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 193(5):486, 2016
Staruch M, Kucharcyzk A, Zawadzka K, et al: Sexual activity during pregnancy. Neuro Endocrinol Lett
37(1):53, 2016
Stephens TV, Payne M, Ball Ro, et al: Protein requirements of healthy pregnancy women during early
and late gestation are higher than current recommendations. J Nutr 145(1):73, 2015
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Adhikari EH, et al: The obstetrical and neonatal impact of maternal opioid
detoxification in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209:267.e1, 2013
Szymanski LM, Kogutt BK: Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry during individually prescribed exercise
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):1026, 2018
Tan PC, Yow CM, Omar SZ: Effect of coital activity on onset of labor in women scheduled for labor
induction. Obstet Gynecol 110:820, 2007
Taylor CM, Golding J, Emond AM: Adverse effects of maternal lead levels on birth outcomes in the
ALSPAC study: a prospective birth cohort study. BJOG 122(3):322, 2015
Tong VT, Dietz PM, Morrow B, et al: Trends in smoking before, during, and after pregnancy—
pregnancy risk assessment monitoring system, United States, 40 sites, 2000–2010. MMWR 62(6):1,
2013

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: 2019 EPA-FDA advice about eating fish. 2019. Available at:
www.fda.gov/food/consumers/advice-about-eating-fish. Accessed October 8, 2019
Villar J, Báaqeel H, Piaggio G, et al: WHO antenatal care randomised trial for the evaluation of a new
model of routine antenatal care. Lancet 357:1551, 2001
West KP: Vitamin A deficiency disorders in children and women. Food Nutr Bull 24:S78, 2003
Whittington JR, Simmons PM, Phillips AM, et al: The use of electronic cigarettes in pregnancy: a review
of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(9):544, 2018
Widen EM, Whyatt RM, Hoepner LA, et al: Excessive gestational weight gain is associated with longterm body fat and weight retention at 7 y postpartum in African American and Dominican mothers
with underweight, normal, and overweight prepregnancy BMI. Am J Clin Nutr 102(6):1460, 2015
Wilson DL, Barnes M, Ellett L, et al: Decreased sleep efficiency, increased wake after sleep onset and
increased cortical arousals in late pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 51(1):38, 2011

SECTION 5

FIRST- AND SECONDTRIMESTER PREGNANCY LOSS

